Chapter10.

Surgical Instrumentation.

Learning Objectives,

As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to, Discuss the importance of surgical instruments and the role of the Sterile Processing technician in instrument care and handling

1.  Review basic steps in the surgical instrument manufacturing process
2.  Define basic categories of surgical instruments based upon their functions and identify the points of inspection
3.  Identify common chemical solutions that can damage stainless steel instruments
4.  Explain procedures to test instruments for sharpness
5.  Review instrument marking methods used for faster and easier device identification
6.  Identify common errors when assembling instruments and how to avoid them

INTRODUCTION.

Approximately 310 million major surgeries are performed each year, with 40 to 50 million of those procedure performed in the U.S. Ambulatory surgery centers and clinics significantly increase the total number of procedures performed in the U.S. Add in procedures from dental centers and other facilities, and it is easy to see that literally billions of surgical instruments are processed in the U.S. annually. Each of these devices has the potential to cause harm to a patient.

Sterile Processing technicians are responsible for helping ensure that instruments needed for each procedure are safe, functional and available when needed. To reach this critical goal, it is essential that SP technicians properly clean, decontaminate, package and sterilize instruments. It is also critical they understand how to identify, inspect and test these devices. SP technicians must also ensure that instrument sets and trays are complete and neatly organized to enable the end user to find instruments easily.

It is impossible for any technician to identify every instrument in existence; however, skilled technicians can identify the vast majority of instruments in their facility's inventory. This chapter provides some background information about common instruments and instrumentation related processes applicable to most facilities.

THE IMPORTANT ROLE OF INSTRUMENT SELECTION AND INSPECTION

Although many instruments may appear similar, they may have very different functions. Each is designed to perform in a specific situation. Placing the wrong instrument into a set can cause serious problems during a surgical procedure. Many instruments come in various sizes. Placing the wrong size instrument in a set may have the same effect as placing the wrong instrument in the set.

While identifying and selecting the correct instrument for each set is crucial, knowing how to inspect the instrument is just as important. Placing dull scissors or forceps with a missing tooth into a set, for example, can cause delays in the procedure and may also harm the patient. Loose or damaged parts can fall into a patient during a procedure, potentially causing injury to the patient. Each set must be functional, complete and neat.

Inspecting devices for cleanliness is also important. Instruments may appear clean on the outside, but careful inspection of the entire instrument may show that it was not properly cleaned. Instrument assembly is another vital role of the SP technician. When an instrument tray or set is completed *by* the SP technician, it will not be checked again until it reaches the point of use. At that point, errors such as defective or missing instruments­ can cause serious problems.

Some Basic Questions

Watching an experienced instrument assembly technician work may create the impression that the job is an easy one; however, that is not at all the case. Assembly technicians must know the instruments they handle. They must be able to identify them, identify quality issues, test them as necessary, correctly prepare them for the sterilization process and prioritize to ensure that instruments are ready when needed.

Those outcomes begin before the assembly process as technicians learn about the instruments they handle. There are several common questions that instrument assembly technicians ask when they begin working with instruments. Knowing the answers to those questions can help establish a good starting point for instrument care and handling. Some key questions may include:

Where do instruments come from?

Physicians identify the specific instruments needed to perform various procedures. Most instruments are purchased by the healthcare facility and maintained by SP. Some instruments are sent to the facility on loan for a specific surgery and must be returned to the vendor after use.

Why must all instrument requirements be so exacting

The human body is very complex. Surgeons need exactly the right instrument to perform specific functions. Devices that appear similar can be used for very different procedures or purposes.

How do instruments get their names?

Many instruments get their names from the part of the anatomy where they were designed to be used. Instruments are sometimes named after the surgeon who invented them. The Bookwalter retractor, for example, is named after its inventor, Dr. John Bookwalter. Other common examples of instruments named after surgeons include Debakey and Mayo.

Do all healthcare facilities have the same instruments?

No. The type of instruments that a facility has will be determined by the types of procedures performed and by surgeon preference. Instruments also vary by manufacturer, so facilities may have instruments with the same names but different manufacturers.

How are instruments introduced into the facility?

Instruments usually enter the facility under three specific processes. Most instruments are purchased by the healthcare facility and maintained by SP. Some instruments are sent to the facility on loan for a specific surgery and must be returned to the vendor after use. Other instruments are owned by the vendor and left at the facility as consignment instruments.

Why are instruments so expensive?

Surgical instruments are precision tools. Manufacturing surgical instruments is very labor intensive process. Most instruments are made using a combination of machine and hand labor. Fine details, such as sharpening, inspection and other steps, are performed by hand. The combination of materials used and labor costs makes instrument production expensive.

In this era of high technology, SP technicians may imagine that instruments are stamped out on a high speed assembly line, packaged, and then shipped to the customer; however, this is not the case. The manufacturing process requires time consuming, hands on labor from highly skilled professionals.

**THE INSTRUMENT MANUFACTURING PROCESS**

Selecting Materials

The study of the surgical instrument manufacturing process begins by considering the raw materials used to create them. Most are produced from **stainless steel;** however, other materials, such as titanium, copper and silver, are also widely used.

Stainless steel can, in fact, stain, spot and rust; therefore, the more appropriate name is the stain resistant. Proper care will ensure that a stainless instrument performs as it should and lasts a long time.

Several types of stainless steel are used to produce surgical instruments.

One type is the 400 series stainless steel.

This steel is hard and, and used when sharp cutting edges are needed. Instruments produced with 400 series steel include: **scissors, osteotomes, chisels, rongeurs, forceps, hemostatic forceps** and **needle holders.**

This hardened steel is known as **martensitic stainless steel.**

The second most popular steel used to manufacture surgical instruments is 300 series stainless steel.

This steel offers high corrosion resistance. Even though 300 series steel does not provide the hardness properties of its 400 series counterpart, it is more workable and malleable. Instruments produced with 300 series stainless steel include: **retractors, cannulas, rib spreaders** and **suction devices.**

This softer type of steel is called **austenitic stainless steel.**

Manufacturing Steps

The next step in manufacturing a surgical instrument is forging the material to create a stamp of its rough outline from a heated bar of stainless steel. The heating and cooling process used to create an instrument is very important because good forging produces good instruments.

Most high quality forgings come from mills in Germany, but forgings also come from Japan, Pakistan, Malaysia, France and Sweden. After the forging is completed, the instrument must be ground and milled and have the excess steel removed. Some instruments require more than 20 milling operations to create the male and female halves and the cutting of **serrations** and **ratchets.**

**Key Terms to remember are:**

-   **Stainless steel:** An alloy of steel with chromium and sometimes another element, such as nickel or molybdenum, that is highly resistant to rusting and ordinary corrosion
-   **Scissors:** Surgical instruments used to cut, incise and/or dissect tissue
-   **Osteotomes:** Chisel like instruments used to cut or shave bone
-   **Chisels:** Wedge shaped instruments used to cut or shape bone
-   **Rongeurs:** Surgical instruments used to cut or bite away at bone and tissue
-   **Forceps:** Instruments used for grasping, holding firmly or exerting traction upon objects
-   **Hemostatic forceps:** Surgical instruments used to control the flow of blood
-   **Needle holders:** Surgical instruments designed to drive suture needles to close or rejoin a wound or surgical site. Also known as needle drivers
-   **Martensitic stainless steel:** This metal is also known as 400 series stainless steel. It is magnetic and may be heat hardened
-   **Retractors:** Surgical instruments primarily used to move tissues and organs to keep the surgical site exposed throughout surgery
-   **Cannulas:** Surgical instruments with a hollow barrel (or lumen) through their center. Cannulas are often inserted for drainage
-   **Rib spreaders:** A retractor used to expose the chest
-   **Suction devices:** Surgical instruments used to extract blood and other fluids from a surgical site
-   **Austenitic stainless steel:** Also known as the 300 series stainless steel. It is non magnetic, cannot be heat hardened and is more corrosion resistant than martensitic stainless steel
-   **Serrations:** Parallel grooves in the jaws of surgical instruments
-   **Ratchet:** The part of a surgical instrument that locks the handles in place

In today's instrument manufacturing environment, there is more reliance on machines than in years past. Despite technical advances, however, there is still a significant amount of the milling process that must be done by hand. Instrument manufacturers perform hundreds of quality checks and finishing applications to every instrument during the manufacturing process lo ensure quality.

Upon completion of the assembly process, instruments undergo a final heating procedure, called tempering. After tempering, the instruments are polished. Polishing is necessary to achieve a smooth finish, which ultimately determines the final appearance or finish of the instrument. Surgical instruments may be shiny a mirror finish, or may have a matte or satin finish (gray colored surface that does not reflect light). Both finishes are widely accepted and create a smooth surface; however, the mirror finish is smoother and tends to stain less frequently.

Next, the passivation layer is applied. **Passivation** uses nitric acid to remove all of the iron content still found on the outside layer of the instrument. The removal of this iron helps build a protective outside layer of chromium oxide. This layer is highly resistant to corrosion and continues to build up throughout the instrument's life.

The passivation layer may become damaged when the instrument is abused by using abrasive cleaners, saline and chemicals not approved for use by the manufacturer. The instrument is then ready for final inspection where it will be carefully examined. Ratchets, tips, scissor blades, serrations, **box locks** and spot welds must be tested. Finally, the instrument is ready to be etched with the company name and catalog number. Acid chemical, stamping and lasers are some methods used for this purpose.

-   **Passivation:** A chemical process applied during instrument manufacturing that provides a corrosion­ resistant finish by forming a thin, transparent oxide film
-   **Box locks:** Point where the two jaws or blades of an instrument connect and pivot

The surgical instrument manufacturing process is lengthy and detailed and requires a significant amount of experience, skill and craftsmanship. A typical manufacturing cycle from forging to finished instrument usually takes up to six weeks.

THE INSTRUMENT WORKSTATION

The first step in instrument inspection begins before the instruments are identified and inspected. Instrument technicians must have a workstation that includes the tools and supplies needed to properly identify, inspect, assemble and package instruments for sterilization. The area should be clean, well lit, large enough to handle instruments comfortably and contain all the tools and supplies needed to carry out those functions.

Items including:

-   **Information.**
    -   Each instrument must have instructions for identification, inspection, testing assembly, sterilization, packaging and any special instructions the assembly technician must be aware of when completing the specific set or tray. This information is contained in the instrument instructions for use or IFU and the instrument computer system or manual count sheets. Technicians must always follow this information without any deviations or from memory.
-   **Inspection tools.**
    -   Instruments require devices and or supplies to carry out the inspection process. This process may include the use of lighted magnification devices, borescopes, or other specific testing supplies as specified in the instruments' IFU. For example, scissors testing materials, index cards, plastic dowel rods.
-   **Devices that facilitate sterilization and protect instruments:**
    -   These devices are designed to help ensure that the sterilant can reach all surfaces of the instruments and protect the instruments from damage. Stringers and tip protectors are examples of such items.
-   **Workstations:** must be kept clean and free from contamination, dust and lint. This can be accomplished with routine cleaning and hand hygiene.

**Important Note**: All assembly technicians must take precautions to reduce the level of contamination in the area by keeping items, such as personal electronics, purses or bags, food and drink, and any other personal items that can transmit bacteria must be kept away from the workstation and the department.

Contamination must be kept to a minimum. When inspecting instruments for cleanliness, a soiled instrument will be identified. Those instruments must be returned to the decontamination area for cleaning. They should not be cleaned at the assembly workstation. After a soiled instrument is discovered, the instrument station should be cleaned to help reduce the risk of cross contamination.

CLASSIFICATION AND OVERVIEW OF SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS

Surgical instruments are designed for a specific surgical purpose. Injury to the patient and destruction of or damage to the instrument can occur when the incorrect instrument is used.

For example, one might incorrectly pull a pin using a needle holder instead of a pin puller or a pair of pliers, which can damage the needle holder.

Hemostatic Forceps.

The primary function of hemostatic forceps is to control the flow of blood. To properly inspect and test surgical instruments, SP technicians must know the anatomy and points of inspection of the devices and how to measure them. Basic instruments can also be identified by their size, serrations or blades. Instruments that look alike at first glance may be very different upon closer inspection. For example, The Crile has serrations the complete length of the jaw, while the Kelly only has serrations part of the way.

Needle Holders.

These instruments are designed to drive suture needles to close surgical sites.

Needle holder **jaws,** the portion that holds the needle, can be manufactured with stainless steel or tungsten carbide:

-   **Stainless steel jaws:** Have two patterns of jaw tread, a smooth or serrated. Stainless steel jaw treads cannot be repaired, re jawed, or have serrations replaced after they wear out. This can occur with one or two years of use, and then the needle holder must be replaced.
-   **Tungsten carbide jaws:** are The most popular needle holders used in surgical use have these jaws. The key visual factor is the bright gold rings on the handle.  Gold plated on the instrument indicates that the working portion the jaw, is made of tungsten carbide. Jaws made from this metal are typically preferred because they are harder, last longer, grip the needle more firmly and can be replaced.
-   **Jaws:** Two or more opposable parts that open and close; used for holding or crushing something between them.

Other names for needle holders are needle drivers, diamond jaws and gold handles. The two most common needle holder designs are Mayo Hegar and Crile Wood.

Tissue Forceps

The primary function of tissue forceps is to manipulate tissue. A design feature of this tweezer like forceps is the multiple­ teeth configuration at the distal tips. The teeth assist in grasping tissue and provide a more secure grip.

The most common jaw or teeth configuration for tissue forceps is one tooth on one side and two teeth on the other. With this design, the teeth interlock and the configuration is indicated by 1x2. Other common teeth configurations are 2x3, 3x4, 5x6, 9x9 and 1 x2 with serrations. Other names for tissue forceps are rat tooth, brown forceps and pickups.

Dressing Forceps

Dressing forceps are similar to tissue forceps, except they have serrations instead of teeth at the distal end. The primary function of this instrument is to manipulate tissue and pack surgical sites. Other names for dressing forceps are smooth forceps and plain forceps.

Retractors.

The primary function of a retractor is to move tissue aside for exposure and visualization of the surgical site. Retractors can be handheld, self retaining or table mounted. Small finger held retractors move and hold skin and subcutaneous tissues, while larger retractors are used to retract muscle tissue and organs.

-   **Self retaining retractors:** are designed with a mechanical action that keeps them open to retract.

To test a self retaining retractor, simply push down on the retractor lever and release. If the lever springs up, the instrument is working properly. If the lever remains in the down position, remove it from the instrument set and send the instrument to the repair vendor. Some common self retaining retractors are Weitlaner, Gelpi and Beckman Adson.

Scissors

The primary function of scissors is to cut tissue, suture and other material in the surgical field. For **dissection,** curved scissors are primarily used because their curve allows for better visualization. The opening action of the scissors also helps to dissect and spread tissue.

-   **Dissection:** The process of cutting apart or separating tissue.
-   **Mayo scissors:** are one of the most popular scissors used and are identified by beveled blades. The second most popular Mayo design is the Mayo Noble. does not have a beveled blade.
-   **Surgical scissors:** have various blade features for specific surgical applications:
-   **Tungsten carbide blades:** These scissors have gold rings on the handles and tungsten carbide blade edges. Scissors with these blades have a harder and stronger cutting edge and they allow the scissors to remain sharper for a longer time than other scissors. Their primary design function is tissue dissection.
-   **Serrated blades:** The design feature of a serrated blade is the prevention of tissue slippage or escape during cutting. Serrations are generally found on one of the blades; however, there are some scissors with dual blade serrations.
-   **Micro grind or supercut blades:** Black rings visually identify these scissors from standard or gold handled tungsten carbide scissors. The design of a black handled scissors is to simulate a tissue lancing/slicing action. While all other scissors cut tissue with a crushing action, black handled scissors has one blade sharpened like a knife to slice tissue. The other blade is a standard design that causes a guillotine effect. Black handled scissors must be specially sharpened.

Suction Devices

The primary function of suction devices is to extract or suction blood and fluids from the surgical site. The two most common suction devices are Baron and Frazier suction tubes. These suction devices include a metal stylet that is used during the surgical procedure to unclog the suction channel. A borescope can be used with lumened devices to help inspect and visualize cleanliness within the lumen.

Single and Double Action Rongeurs

The primary function of a rongeur is to cut or bite away at bone and tissue. The difference between a single action and a double action rongeur is the design of how the jaws close. With a double action instrument, the surgeon squeezes the handle, which creates two movements for the jaw to close.

This double movement reduces the amount of hand strength needed, so the instrument bites more with less hand strength. The main inspection point on single and double action rongeurs is the jaws. Any dents or gouges of the jaws prevent the instrument from working properly.

Kerrison or Laminectomy Rongeurs

The primary function of this style of rongeur is to remove the disc or lamina during spine surgery. The distal portion must be inspected after each use to look for bioburden and damage to the cutting edge. When Kenison rongeurs are being assembled in trays, it is important to identify the different bite designs**.**

If a Kenison rongeur is sticking in a closed position, a repair vendor will need to disassemble, polish, sharpen and reassemble the instrument.

Graves and Pederson Vaginal Speculums

The primary use of these medical instruments is to expose the vaginal cavity. One important inspection point is to ensure that the thumb screws are present and functioning. It is also important to inspect all sides of the blades for damage.

Nail Nippers

The primary function of nail nippers is to cut toenails and fingernails and, occasionally, to trim small bone fragments. The culling surface and edge should be inspected, along with the hinge area and spring.

COMMON ABBREVIATIONS

When SP technicians assemble instrumentation, they may encounter several abbreviations listed on the assembly count sheet. Abbreviations can be used to identify the type of instrument and specific characteristics of the instrument. It is important for SP technicians to recognize and understand the abbreviations to ensure the correct instrument is placed in the proper set or tray.

SOLUTIONS THAT DAMAGE INSTRUMENTS

Numerous solutions, ranging from those typically used for housekeeping to kitchen related cleaning purposes, can damage stainless steel instruments. If the solution's container does not specifically note that its intended purpose is for use on surgical instruments, the product should not be used to clean them. It is good practice to follow the instrument IFU closely when using any chemicals or solutions.

**The following Solutions That will Damage Surgical Instruments.**

-   Iodine
-   Hand soaps
-   Saline
-   Betadine
-   Peroxide
-   Dish soaps
-   Bleach
-   Soaking in saline
-   Soaking in water

The use of saline as a soaking or rinsing agent accelerates rusting and pitting of surgical instruments. In many cases, the use of saline may void instrument warranties; therefore, controlling instrument exposure to saline is very important. For clinical reasons, OR personnel cannot eliminate the exposure of stainless steel instruments to saline; however, after the surgical procedures are completed, saline must be removed as an early step in the cleaning process.

INSTRUMENT SHARPNESS TESTING AND IDENTIFICATION

Instrument sharpness testing is essential to monitor the sharpness of surgical instruments

**Instrument: Scissors longer than 4.5 Inches**

-   **Test material:** Red test material made latex); orange material (latex free)
-   **Test:** Scissors must be able to cut through to the tip two to three times. The distal tips of scissors are the most crucial portion because this is where they first become dull. They must cut cleanly through the tips of the instrument.

**Instrument: Scissors 4.5" and shorter**

-   **Test material:** Yellow test material
-   **Test:** Scissors must be able to cut through the lips two to three times. The distal lips of scissors are the most crucial portion; they must cut cleanly through the tips of the instrument

**Instrument: Bone cutter**

-   **Test material:** Index card
-   **Test:** Cut off a piece of the index card

**Instrument: Kerrison rongeur**

-   **Test material:** Index card
-   **Test:** Punch a clean hole through the card

**Instrument: Laminectomy rongeur**

-   **Test material:** Index card
-   **Test:** The rongeur should make a clean bite using half the jaw

**Instrument: Double action rongeur**

-   **Test material:** Index card
-   **Test:** The rongeur should make a clean bite through the card

**Instrument: Chisels and osteotomes**

-   **Test material:** Plastic dowel rod
-   **Test:** Shave off pieces of the dowel rod

**Instrument: Bone curette**

-   **Test material:** Plastic dowel rod
-   **Test:** Shave off pieces of the dowel rod

INSTRUMENT IDENTIFICATION METHODS

There are thousands of different surgical instruments, and many may look quite similar. SP technicians must ensure that the correct instruments are placed into the proper trays. Many healthcare facilities use different instrument marking methods to mark instruments for faster and easier identification.

Marking surgical instruments for identification can be done in several ways. The use of tape is one popular method for identifying instruments. Although this is a seemingly simple approach, it is important to follow the IFU of the tape manufacturer.

When using tape to identify instruments, inspection of the tape each time the device is processed is very important. Tape that is loose, damaged or peeling must be removed and replaced because microorganisms under the loose or damaged tape are very difficult to clean. Peeling and damaged tape can inadvertently fall into the patient, potentially causing an infection.

There are other methods of marking instruments. Before utilizing any of these methods, it is best to contact the instrument manufacturer for their advice.

-   **Acid base etching:** This process can be done by the instrument repair vendor, or a kit may be purchased so the etching process can be done at the facility. Acid base etching uses a stencil, solutions and electricity to mark stainless steel. This process is semi permanent and the etching can be buffed off during the instrument repair process.
-   **Heat fused nylon:** This color coding is often referred to as "dipping" and is typically done in a repair facility. Heat fused nylon is a liquid powder coating process that leaves a thin layer of colored nylon on the instrument. Nylon coating can last years; however, once it begins to chip, all nylon must be removed from the instrument.
-   **Powder coating:** This is a process that uses polymer resin combined with other additives to form a powder. The powder is then sprayed onto an instrument using an electrostatic spray gun and cured to form a high density bond. Powder coating provides a durable, thin, smooth finish to the instrument. Powder coated instruments are susceptible to cracks, nicks and damage from harsh cleaning chemicals over time.
-   **Laser etching:** This durable process is usually done by the manufacturer or an outside vendor.
-   **Dot matrix:** These systems are relatively inexpensive and can be applied by SP technicians.

**The two most popular types of dot systems are:**

**The dot matrix system**, where a small barcode containing the instrument information is applied with pressure sensitive tape

and

**The Dot Peen system,** where a laser or tungsten stylet is used to implant the information onto an instrument.

INSTRUMENT LUBRICATION

Many surgical instruments with moving parts must be lubricated after each use and in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. All lubricants must be approved for use as a surgical instrument lubricant and for the type of sterilization method that will be used on the instrument.

The use of a neutral­ pH lubricant extends the life of the instrument and makes the device easier for the surgeon to use. While most washer­ disinfectors will lubricate instruments, some instruments may need to be lubricated again during assembly. Each SP workstation should have lubrication available for this purpose. Lubricants are available in spray bottle formulas. The point of application should be the instrument's hinged area or any working component such as a moving or sliding area.

TIPS TO PROTECT INSTRUMENTS FROM DAMAGE

Instruments are an expensive asset for any facility. Protecting the instruments is a part of every SP technician's job. When handled properly, many instruments can remain in active service for many years.

**The following are some helpful tips:**

-   Always follow the manufacturer's instructions for cleaning, lubrication and sterilization. These instructions were developed by the instrument manufacturer to help ensure the instrument's longevity.
-   Place heavy instruments on the bottom or side of the tray. This will help protect the smaller, more delicate instruments.
-   Select an instrument tray that allows adequate space for weight distribution. Overcrowding instruments can cause damage.
-   All curved instruments should be curved in the same direction to protect tips from damage.
-   Tissue and dressing forceps should be softly nested together or placed close to each other in the tray or peel pack. Do not push the forceps together. Leave some space between each forceps so that the sterilant can reach all surfaces.
-   Delicate instruments should be kept in approved micro cases or small protective cases within the surgical tray.
-   The use of metal instrument holders, called stringers, can assist in faster sterile field assembly and safer handling of the instruments, especially sharps. Stringers also hold the instruments in the open position during sterilization.
-   Improper names/labels can cause confusion, communication delays and frustration.
-   Failure to follow specific IFU can result in defective instruments, sterilization failure or long term damage to the instruments
-   Relying on a numeric count instead of identifying each instrument can result in incorrect instruments in the tray
-   Instruments that are not specifically identified are also more likely to go without inspection.
-   Failure to test instruments correctly increases the risk that defective instruments will make their way into surgical procedures. A defective instrument can pose a risk to a patient and can cause frustration for the surgeon and OR staff
-   Multi part instruments may be rendered unusable due to missing or defective parts
-   All instruments should receive through processing every Lime. Cutting corners may result in incorrect, unsafe or malfunctioning instruments being sent for use in a procedure
-   Assembling a multi part instrument as a part of the inspection process helps ensure that all parts are available and without damage that may impede the procedure
-   Timelines can be tight in SP areas, and every effort should be made to meet them without compromising patient safety
-   Collaborate with colleagues to improve efficiencies and communicate with customers to establish realistic timelines

COMMON INSTRUMENT ASSEMBLY ERRORS

When instrument errors happen, they can cause frustration, delay of treatment and, in some cases, physical harm to the patient. The goal should always be to eliminate errors in instrument inspection and assembly.

That goal requires attention to detail, good education and information. Instrument assembly technicians also need the ability to adapt to changes. Technology is advancing, and needs continue to evolve. Assembly technicians must develop the ability to learn, unlearn and relearn as changes are implemented.

In CONCLUSION.

Properly identifying instruments and following the proper inspection protocols help ensure instrument trays are assembled correctly and all the instruments are clean and functional. Carefully following the manufacturers' IFU and paying meticulous attention to detail will help keep the instruments in good repair and extend the life of these expensive items.

SP technicians are the last individuals to touch instruments before they are received in a procedure area; therefore, their quality of work is critical to successful patient outcomes.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Stainless steel**
-   **Scissors**
-   **Osteotomes**
-   **Chisel**
-   **Rongeurs**
-   **Forceps**
-   **Hemostatic forceps**
-   **Needle holders**
-   **Martensitic**
-   **Retractors**
-   **Cannulas**
-   **Rib spreaders**
-   **Suction devices**
-   **Austenitic**
-   **Serrations**
-   **Ratchets**
-   **Passivation**
-   **Box Lock**
-   **Jaws**
-   **Dissection**

This concludes Chapter 10. Thank you
