Chapter 11.

**Complex Surgical Instruments.**

Learning Objectives. As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to, Discuss procedures to care for powered surgical instruments

1.  Explain critical protocols for processing endoscopic instruments
2.  Discuss rigid and flexible endoscopes and their accessories
3.  Discuss processes for loaned instrumentation

INTRODUCTION

Advances in many types of surgical procedures have improved patient outcomes and shortened hospital stays and recovery time. At the same time, the instruments used in these procedures have become more complex and difficult to process.

Surgical instruments have evolved from simple devices to the complex surgical devices used today. Forceps, scissors, needle holders and retractors, along with numerous other simple instruments, are still commonly used but are joined by powered surgical instruments, endoscopes, orthopedic, spinal, robotic, neurological and other highly sophisticated and delicate devices with complex components such as circuit boards and computer chips.

Many of the complex instruments that Sterile Processing technicians process require special handling and care. This instrumentation may range from a single instrument or a few sophisticated instruments in a small tray to those that comprise many trays and consist of hundreds of instruments.

The requirements for processing complex instruments are the same as for processing less complex devices: thorough cleaning, detailed inspection, proper packaging, and disinfection or sterilization. One of the greatest challenges that SP technicians face is keeping abreast of new and evolving instruments and their specific processing requirements. Complex instruments are costly to purchase and repair and represent a large financial investment for the facility. Due to the associated expense, many facilities *may* not have backup instrumentation available, so careful handling of these instruments is essential.

This chapter addresses basic information about some of the complex instruments that may cause processing concerns for SP technicians.

POWERED SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS

The use of drills and saws by physicians dates as far back as 5,000 to 7,000 years ago. In the mid 1800s, the dental industry took the lead in powered instrumentation by developing powered dental drills. The fields of neurosurgery, orthopedics and otology have also played key roles in the development of powered surgical instruments now used in every specialty. These developments have revolutionized surgery, making procedures both safer and faster.

The size and design of powered surgical devices range from drills used on the tiniest ear bones to drills and saws used on the largest leg bones. Powered surgical instruments have greatly reduced the brute force and time required for orthopedic surgeries. This, in turn, has allowed surgeons to complete surgeries quicker and with more precision.

Materials used to construct powered surgical instruments are varied, so careful selection of cleaning and disinfection products is critical. The device manufacturer's instructions for use or I F U must be followed to prevent damage.

Powered surgical instruments contain several working components that will be damaged if fluid such as water or a cleaning solution is allowed to penetrate the device's interior. SP technicians should be specifically trained to clean, process and handle powered surgical devices and ensure that fluid invasion does not occur.

Power Sources

There are three main sources of power used for powered surgical instruments.

Electric, compressed gas or pneumatic, and battery powered.

Electric Powered Surgical Instruments

Electric powered instruments are used when physicians need a lightweight instrument for procedures where access is limited such as in maxillofacial, dental and small bone procedures. Like the ones found in hands. An arthroscopy shaver is an example of an electric powered instrument.

Instruments powered by electricity require a power cable that can be sterilized. One end of the cable attaches to the motorized handpiece on the surgical field. The other end attaches to a power unit such as a motor or electrical adapters that plugs into an outlet. These cables require routine maintenance that involves disassembly, cleaning, lubrication, and inspection to look for cuts, nicks and other damage. During cleaning, fluid must not enter the cable or handpiece. Many manufacturers recommend connecting the cable to the handpiece during the cleaning/decontamination process to help prevent fluid invasion. Care must also be taken not to bend the connector pins on the cable.

**The most common problems associated with electric powered equipment are:**

-   Damage to electrical parts during cleaning and disinfection/ sterilization
-   Condensation that enters the equipment when seals wear out
-   Electrical contacts that become worn

**The following are general guidelines for proper care and handling of electric powered instruments and accessories:**

-   Do not immerse the equipment in any solution, including water, unless the manufacturer's IFU specifically states that the device can be submerged.
-   Do not use solvents or lubricants, unless specified by the equipment manufacturer.
-   Use a brush to clean the distal tip and lumens. Follow the IFU for the correct size and type of brush to use for each area.
-   Carefully clean the accessory attachment area in the distal area of the hand piece.
-   Dry the equipment with a clean, non linting cloth.

Electric powered devices usually have a control switch in the handpiece; however, some electric powered equipment can be operated with a foot switch or pedal.

Foot switches may have a cable to attach to the instrument console, or they may be wireless. To clean foot switches, follow the manufacturer's instructions and avoid pulling on or kinking the power cord or damaging the sensors.

Pneumatic Powered Surgical Instruments

Pneumatic or compressed air or gas powered instruments come in various sizes and allow the surgeon to work on small, medium and larger bones. Sternum saws, sagittal saws, and drills are popular pneumatic powered instruments.

Pneumatic powered instruments require a hose that can be sterilized. One end of the hose attaches to the motorized handpiece on the surgical field; the other end attaches to the source of compressed air/gas, which can come from a standalone cylinder or tank with a pressure regulator or be piped in through a wall or column mounted regulator panel.

**Instrument hoses must be carefully inspected for cleanliness.**

If the hose casing becomes damaged or bubbled, it must be removed from service. Fluid must not enter the hose or hand piece during processing. Many manufacturers recommend connecting the hose to the handpiece during cleaning to help prevent fluid invasion and related damage.

Different types of powered instruments require different operating pressures; a chart of these pressures should be available where the instruments are processed. SP technicians must follow the manufacturer's instructions and test instruments using the appropriate air/gas. Extreme care is required because testing instruments at an improper pressure can injure the operator and or severely damage the instrument.

**To properly care for and handle pneumatic equipment:**

-   Use a decontamination hose to protect inner components.
-   Never immerse in any solution (including water), unless the manufacturer's IFU specifically states the device can be submerged.
-   Carefully clean the outer casing of the handpiece using a damp, non linting cloth.
-   To clean attachments, insert the appropriate manufacturer­ recommended cleaning brush into attachments and burr guards
-   Burr guards must be lubricated according to the manufacturer's instructions
-   Lubricate per the I F U.

How to Create a Decontamination Hose

Decontamination hoses are made by cutting small pieces of a damaged pneumatic hose, placing both regulator ends on the hose, and marking the hose in some way to identify it as non functional. A popular way of marking the hose is with red tape.

Care of Air Hoses

All pneumatic equipment must be attached to an air hose to operate. Sterilization issues are the primary reason hoses fail because heat from sterilization breaks down the rubber components and O rings and causes air leakage. To clean the hose, use a mild detergent. Don't allow fluids to enter the hose and never use abrasives to wash the hose. Take care when coiling the hose during handling. Hoses should not be coiled tightly. The proper coil size for sterilization should be nine to 12 inches.

Battery Powered Surgical Instruments

Battery powered surgical instruments are cord free and work well with the procedures performed on larger, denser bones. Total hip and knee replacement surgeries are examples of such procedures. Batteries and chargers are specific to each system and are not interchangeable.

**Common Powered Surgical Instruments:**

-   Dermatome/dermabraders for harvesting skin grafts or reshaping skin surfaces
-   Ceba tomes for removing bone cement
-   Sternal or sternum saws to split the sternum and allow access for open heart surgery
-   Dental drills for repair/reconstructive work on teeth and jawbones
-   Micro drills for reshaping middle ear bones or
-   driving very small wires through bones
-   Wire drivers, drills and saws to work on the smallest facial bones to the largest bones such as those in the leg
-   Saws designed to perform specific cutting actions

**To properly care for battery powered instruments:**

-   Never immerse handpieces, attachments or batteries in any solution, including water, unless approved by the manufacturer.
-   Clean surgical debris from attachments, batteries and handpieces using brushes, a damp, non linting cloth, and a manufacturer recommended mild detergent. Carefully clean the attachment area of the handpiece.
-   Rinse with water, while assuring that the water does not enter the battery contact area.

How to Create a Decontamination Battery

Locate an unrepairable battery for each style of powered surgical instrument. Use instrument marking tape to make a red X on the battery packs and keep these batteries in the decontamination area. When battery powered equipment enters the Sterile Processing decontamination area, select and insert the appropriate battery pack to protect the electrical components from moisture.

**Important Note**: While this does help prevent moisture from entering the unit, care should still be taken to avoid contact with excess moisture.

-   Use a decontamination battery to protect electrical components from moisture.
-   Check all moving parts for cleanliness and function.
-   Lubricate per the manufacturer's IFU
-   Some manufacturers recommend operating handpieces to ensure proper function and disperse lubrication if added prior to packaging for sterilization.
-   Attach accessories, including batteries, to the handpieces to ensure they fit and function properly.

Package and sterilize the device, per the manufacturer's recommendations. Special racks or positioning devices may be needed to ensure that all device surfaces are properly exposed to the sterilant and to ensure that condensation does not collect. Some types of packaging, such as peel packs, are not suitable for all types of powered instruments and accessories. Check the manufacturer's packaging recommendations.

-   Charge, package and sterilize batteries per the IFU. Document the charging date on the outside of the package

**Common Reasons for Powered Equipment Repairs:**

Powered surgical equipment is expensive to purchase and repair.

**Common causes of damage include:**

-   Corrosion of internal components from condensation, steam, fluid invasion or improper cleaning
-   Physical damage due to mishandling
-   Lack of or improper preventive maintenance

Motorized hand pieces are very delicate and expensive and require special care. Proper use and handling, along with regular preventive maintenance and service, will help ensure that the devices are available for safe, effective use.

ENDOSCOPES

The term endoscopy means looking inside. Endoscopic procedures allow a physician to look inside the body through an endoscope. Endoscopic procedures are considered minimally invasive because they do not involve a large incision. This minimally invasive instrumentation allows the physician to perform procedures either through natural body openings like the mouth, nose or anus, or through small incisions that provide access for endoscopic instrumentation. This instrumentation may be used to view a specific area of the body or, with the addition of other instruments, perform multiple types of surgeries.

The first endoscopes were developed in Germany in the 1800s. however, the use and development of endoscopes became more popular after World War II. In the 1950s, the flexible endoscope was introduced. Today, fiber optics a technology that uses glass or plastic threads or fibers to transmit data and **light emitting diodes or LEDs,** are the primary carriers/sources of light for endoscopic surgery.

-   **Endoscope is** An instrument used to examine the interior of a hollow organ or body cavity
-   **Light emitting diode or LED is a** Semiconductor diode that emits light when voltage is applied

All endoscopes allow for light and image transmission. Some endoscopes also provide a working channel, allowing the surgeon to perform surgical procedures. LED serve as tiny light bulbs. Fiber optics do not produce light; instead, they act as wires to carry light generated from an external source.

Light is a critical factor in endoscopic procedures, as the quality of the image or picture is largely dependent on light quality and quantity. It is important to check the endoscope, light source and carrier fiber optic cord to ensure they are in working order each time the endoscope is processed. The dark areas indicate damaged light fibers.

The second function of endoscopes is to transmit the reflected image back to the surgeon's eye or to a video system. This can be accomplished through the use of fiber optic bundles or computer chips inside the endoscope.

Endoscope Classification

The term endoscope describes all devices used to view inside a body cavity. When discussing endoscopes, it is important to properly classify the type of endoscope in use because function, care and handling processes are different for each classification.

This section will focus on rigid, semi rigid and flexible endoscopes.

The classification of rigid, semi rigid and flexible relates to an endoscope's ability to bend without damaging the device.

Operative and Non Operative Endoscopes

The first endoscopes were non operative, meaning the surgeon could view anatomy through the device but could not perform a surgical procedure such as a biopsy. Operative endoscope technology permitted surgeons to do much more than diagnose a condition; they could perform corrective surgeries with these new minimally invasive instruments.

Surgical procedures, such as laparoscopy and arthroscopy, came into demand as physicians and patients realized the benefit of shorter hospitalizations, less painful surgical procedures, lower healthcare associated infection or HAI risks, and faster recovery times.

An operative endoscope has a working channel or lumen through which instruments or accessories can be passed to perform surgical procedures.

Technological advancements continue today across surgical specialties, much of which has been fueled by the development of smaller instruments and endoscopes. For example, surgeons can perform endoscopic abdominal, arthroscopic, urological, otolaryngology, cardiac and neurosurgical procedures.

Recent endoscopic developments permit heart conditions to be treated without opening the chest or cutting the ribs, pituitary surgery to be performed through the sinus cavity, and salivary gland stones to be removed endoscopically. Lesions in the gastrointestinal tract and lungs can be directly visualized, and diagnostic biopsies and therapeutic procedures can be performed without major surgery or general anesthesia.

Endoscope Use and Selection

Endoscopes are chosen by the physician based on the type of procedure they are performing. Rigid endoscopes arc appropriate for viewing anatomy where there is straight line access to the site. Semi rigid endoscopes are useful where the line to the surgical site is relatively straight; however, some slight bending of the endoscope shaft may be needed to access the site such as in bladder surgery. Flexible endoscopes are used where straight line access is not possible such as when viewing the esophagus, lungs, kidneys or large intestine. Whether a rigid, semi rigid or flexible endoscope is used, the device serves as the eye of the surgeon.

Due to these instruments' delicate construction as well as their size and frequent handling, endoscopes are at risk of being damaged every time they are handled. Damaged or poorly performing endoscopes result in costly procedure delays, staff and surgeon dissatisfaction and, possibly, patient harm.

RIGID AND SEMI RIGID ENDOSCOPES

Rigid Endoscopes

Rigid endoscopes range in size from very tiny, such as 1.9 millimeter endoscopes used for Sali endoscopy used for internal viewing of the salivary glands to a much larger 15 millimeter endoscopes used for robotic surgical procedures. Rigid endoscopes can be constructed using rigid rod lenses a non video scope or with a video chip mounted in the distal end with video.

Generally, all rigid endoscopes are manufactured using tubes of stainless steel. Rigid endoscopes are designed to allow for some minimal flexing of the shaft, but damage will occur beyond the flex limits.

A general rule is that a rigid endoscope should not be bent. Fiber optics are housed between the inner and outer tubes and transmit light from the light guidepost to the distal end of the endoscope. Operative rigid endoscopes have a working channel that allows the surgeon to pass instruments to perform surgery.

Specialty rigid endoscopes provide the ability to change the direction of view. Other specialty endoscopes contain filters that help the surgeon identify diseased tissue when used in combination with pharmaceuticals and/or different spectrum light sources.

Semi Rigid Endoscopes

Semi rigid endoscopes are termed as such because the shaft is made of a very thin stainless steel, allowing it to bend slightly, without kinking the metal.

Semi rigid endoscopes are primarily used in urology to view the bladder and the distal portion of the ureter.  While they have the ability to bend slightly more than a rigid endoscope, they will be damaged if too much pressure is applied or if they are bent beyond their intended limits.

**Rigid and Semi Rigid Endoscope General Guidelines for Decontamination**

The following are some general guidelines for cleaning rigid and semi rigid endoscopes. Check with the individual endoscope manufacturer for specific instructions.

-   Remove the light source adapters from the light post.
-   Use the cleaning solution as identified in the manufacturer's IFU.
-   Hand wash the endoscope using a soft, non linting cloth. Pay particular attention to the distal tip, as this is where debris collects and is most difficult to remove.
-   If the endoscope has a working channel, thoroughly brush the channel using the manufacturer's recommended brush type and size.
-   Thoroughly rinse the endoscope with critical water and flush the working channel to remove all traces of the cleaning solution.
-   Dry the outside of the endoscope with a clean, non linting cloth. Dry the working channel per the manufacturer's IFU.

New technology allows for automated washing of non operative rigid endoscopes. Check the manufacturer's IFU to verify that the tray and endoscope are approved for automated washing. Automated washing provides multiple benefits such as consistent quality of the wash process.

**Important Note**: Ultrasonic cleaning cycles must not be part of the automated Washing because damage will occur to the rigid endoscope.

Rigid and Semi Rigid Endoscope Inspection

The inspection process is very important for ensuring proper function of an endoscope. The technician must understand the proper procedure for inspection, and the manufacturer's IFU should be followed.

**The following are basic guidelines for addressing endoscope inspection:**

Closely inspect for damage and cleanliness.

Functions, such as light output, image quality and angulations, should be examined .

For rigid endoscopes used with bridges/sheaths, fit should be checked to ensure that the two devices go together with little to no force applied.

For all endoscopes, the distal and proximal windows should be inspected for cleanliness and wiped off with an approved cleaner and a soft cloth, if necessary.

For non video rigid endoscopes, the image quality should be tested by viewing typewritten print through the endoscope from a distance of about one inch. The image should be closely examined in the center and for 360 degrees around the outside edge to ensure there are no blurry or dark areas.

**Note**: Most flexible fiber optic endoscopes have a focus adjusting mechanism near the eyepiece.

Rigid Endoscopic Instruments

Rigid endoscopic instruments come in hundreds of shapes and sizes, and many contain lumens that require special care to ensure that they are properly cleaned. Many instruments come with multiple parts such as a laparoscope with a handle, working insert and outer shaft.

Care and handling are often complicated due to some instrument designs. Hidden areas and moving parts can protect soil during the cleaning process. If the instrument cannot be easily disassembled into component parts, it may be impossible for a technician to determine that the lumens are clean.

Endoscopic and Robotic Instruments

Operative endoscopes require special instrumentation. The following section addresses common instruments used with rigid and semi rigid operative endoscopes.

Laparoscopic Instruments

Most laparoscopic instruments can be easily identified because they are very slender, 3 to 10 millimeters in width and longer. The shafts look like the shaft of pencils or small rods, and many of the tips have the same design as general instruments with the same name. The distal tip of a laparoscopic Allis forceps, for example, is the same design as the distal tip of a general surgery Allis forceps.

Some laparoscopic instruments are used to cut or cauterize during surgery. These instruments will have insulation covering the shaft, which protects the patient from electrical current that flows through the instruments. Laparoscopic insulation is susceptible to pin holes, cracks, tears and overall loosening. These defects must be identified as the instruments are tested and assembled.

Failure to discover pin holes or other damage to the insulation can result in leaked electricity that can damage nearby tissue and organs. These burns can cause infection, extended patient recovery times and other complications.

To inspect the insulation, locate the metal collar at the distal tip. The insulation should fit tightly against the collar; this union should be snug, with no spaces visible.

Next, grip the insulation and try to slide it back. If the insulation slides or moves, the instrument should be sent for repair. Finally, visually check the instrument shaft to look for cuts, cracks and nicks to the insulation, and inspect the insulated handle for chips or cracks.

Electronic testing devices can detect microscopic holes in the insulation of shafts and handles of laparoscopic instruments. Electronic testing with an approved testing device should be done prior to set assembly on the clean side of the Sterile Processing department.

**Note**: All insulated instruments need to be tested for electrical leakage each time they are processed.

Laparoscopic hooks and spatulas are used to cut and/or cauterize. They must be inspected for insulation failure in the shaft and at the distal tip. Cannulated instruments require a brush for proper cleaning. Always use the brush type, size and length recommended by the manufacturer.

**Laparoscopic ring handles are available in several styles such as:**

-   **Free handle:** No ratchet or spring finger, with an open and­ close action
-   **Spring handle:** Opens under slight tension and closes by spring action
-   **Ratchet handle:** Similar to hemostats, with various locking points on the ratchet

While most laparoscopic instrumentation can be mechanically cleaned, careful manual cleaning must lake place first. Some laparoscopic instruments, such as scissors, can use disposable tips. Disposable tips should be removed and discarded prior to instrument cleaning. Manufacturers' cleaning instructions should be meticulously followed. All ports should be flushed, and lumens should be flushed and brushed. Instruments that come apart should be disassembled. Due to the dark colored surface, insulated instruments must be carefully inspected for cleanliness. Spatulas and hook tips are very difficult to clean and must be carefully inspected for cleanliness.

During assembly, multi part instruments should be assembled to ensure they are in working condition. Multi part devices should then be disassembled for sterilization, unless otherwise stated by the instrument manufacturer. To protect these instruments from damage, care must be taken when placing them in a tray. If a tray designed for laparoscopic instruments is used, care should be taken not to bend the instrument shafts when placing or removing the instruments.

Electrosurgical cords connect instruments, such as laparoscopic instruments, to the electrical generator or power source. These cords carry electrical current from the generator to the instrumentation, where the surgical instrument focuses the electrical current to allow cutting and cauterization of tissue. Cords should not be dropped, kinked, twisted or coiled tightly during processing. Careful examination of the cord should be visually performed to inspect for cuts, nicks or any damage that could interrupt the electrical current.

Robotic Instruments

Over the past several years, robotic surgery has become very popular in many surgical specialties. While both laparoscopic and robotic surgery use small incisions to insert instruments and perform surgery, robotic surgery allows the surgeon to be remote from the patient (either across the room or even across a continent). As with laparoscopic surgery, robotic instruments are complex and require careful attention to ensure they are clean, sterile and functional when needed.

Robotic instruments are heavier than laparoscopic instruments. Mechanical and electrical components are located in the proximal end of the instrument. Robotic instruments are more difficult to clean than standard laparoscopic instruments because:

-   They do not come apart for cleaning.
-   The distal end of the instrument rotates and may have open cabling that is difficult to clean.
-   There may be multiple channels to flush in each instrument.

Robotic instrumentation is difficult and time consuming to process; carefully follow the manufacturer’s cleaning instructions. Some IFU contain specific soak times and limit the number of sterilization cycles the instrument can undergo. Always flush and brush the lumens as instructed by the manufacturer. When connecting to an irrigating sonic, ensure the sonic is approved for cleaning robotic instruments and that the correct connectors are utilized.

Robotic instrumentation is very delicate and complex. Careful attention to the manufacturer's IFU throughout the entire process is essential.

Arthroscopic Instruments

Arthroscopic surgery is a type of endoscopic procedure performed on joints. Because joints are small, enclosed areas, the instruments used for arthroscopic surgery are smaller than those used on other endoscopic procedures. Unlike laparoscopic instruments, most arthroscopy instrumentation does not look similar to general surgery instrumentation.

Arthroscopic shavers can become clogged with debris during surgery, which can make them very difficult to clean. The use of a borescope is encouraged to check arthroscopic shavers for cleanliness.

FLEXIBLE ENDOSCOPES

The term flexible means capable of bending and allows the physician to gain easier access to internal body organs. Flexible endoscopes are complex instruments used to visualize inside the body, perform diagnostic tests and surgical procedures, and/or obtain tissue specimens for biopsy.

Flexible endoscopes have revolutionized minimally invasive surgical procedures because they give surgeons access to parts of the body without performing an open procedure. This minimizes tissue damage, patient discomfort and length of stay in the hospital. Like many sophisticated medical devices, the flexible endoscope is a complex instrument that requires processing between patients.

Flexible Endoscope Components

Flexible endoscopes are comprised of a body or handle assembly, universal cord or light cord and an insertion tube the flexible shaft. The body features control knobs that, when actuated, cause the distal end of the endoscope shaft to move. Flexible endoscopes can be classified as either fiber optic or video. The difference between the two is how the image is captured and transmitted by the endoscope.

A fiber optic flexible endoscope gathers the image via a series of lenses at the distal end of the endoscope. The image is transmitted to the eyepiece via a fiber optic bundle. Video flexible endoscopes require a power source and a video system to view the image. "The image is captured and transmitted as an electrical signal to the viewing monitor.

The internal components are contained and protected by an external sheath. The sheath is made of materials that can withstand exposure to bodily fluids and allows easy insertion and withdrawal.

**Note**: Care must always be taken when handling flexible endoscopes because sharp bends of the shaft or umbilical cable can cause damage.

Flexible endoscope lengths range from about 36 to 60 inches and in some special cases even longer. Like rigid endoscopes, flexible endoscopes can also be described as either diagnostic or operative. Operative flexible endoscopes have a working channel that allows the passage of a surgical instruments like biopsy forceps or diagnostic brushes used for scrapings. These endoscopes may also have channels for suction, irrigation, and insufflation to stretch the organ for better viewing.

Different caps are used to protect the endoscope from damage during various phases of reprocessing. If protective water caps are supplied, they must be in place whenever the endoscope is at risk of having water enter the endoscope.

Flexible endoscopes may also come with a venting cap that opens the device to the outside environment. The venting cap is used to allow sterilants to enter and exit the endoscope channels. It is also used for shipping purposes particularly via air freight to equalize pressure inside and outside the endoscope.

**Note**: A venting cap must never be used when the endoscope will be exposed to fluids, as it will allow fluid invasion and will likely result in damage.

CLEANING AND PROCESSING FLEXIBLE ENDOSCOPES

Flexible endoscopes are difficult and time consuming to properly clean. The manufacturer's IFU, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's or CDC's guidelines, the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation's standard, A A M I S T 91. Flexible and semi rigid endoscope processing in health care facilities, and facility protocols must be followed to help ensure the care, handling and processing of all endoscopes and accessory devices.

Technicians who process endoscopes should also follow standard precautions. They must wear personal protective equipment, including gloves, impervious gowns, face masks and shields or goggles, shoe covers and hair coverings.

**Important Note**: AAM I ST91 now states that Flexible and semi rigid endoscope processing in health care facilities endoscopes used in semi critical applications should be sterilized prior to use. If sterilization is not possible, H L D is the minimum advised processing.

Endoscopes should be processed in an area large enough to allow for the safe handling of the instruments.

Be sure to follow the endoscope manufacturer's IFU to ensure that only approved cleaning chemicals are used. Cleaning should be performed with soft, clean, non linting cloths or sponges and brushes specifically designed for use with each specific endoscope.

Not All Endoscopes Are Alike

Due to the significant difference in the processes required for video and non video flexible endoscopes, it is important to follow the manufacturer's IFU for the model and brand of flexible endoscopes being cleaned.

**Basic steps required to reprocess flexible endoscopes include:**

-   Point of use treatment
-   Soiled transport
-   Leak testing
-   Cleaning
-   Rinsing
-   Drying
-   Cleaning verification and inspection
-   High level disinfection or HLD

Point of Use Treatment

Cleaning begins at the point of use to prevent blood or protein material from drying on the instrument. While performing point of use treatment, staff should wear the same type of PPE as is worn in the SPD's decontamination area. The IFU for point­ of use processes should be carefully followed to avoid damaging the endoscope.

Suction channels should be rinsed with clean water to remove as much blood and tissue debris as possible. All disposable items should be removed and discarded. Endoscopes should be treated and transported to the SPD decontamination area as soon as possible following point of use treatment.

Delayed Processing

If endoscopes are not promptly transported to the decontamination area following the procedure, bioburden can harden on the devices and become more difficult to remove. Because of this drying process, some manufactures have developed delayed processing cleaning protocols. Delayed processing usually involves an extended presoak in the decontamination area, when the time from the end of point of use treatment until the start of manual cleaning exceeds 60 minutes.

Even endoscopes that underwent point of use treatment can result in hardened, difficult to clean soil remaining if the device is not cleaned within one hour after the procedure. It is important to follow each manufacturer's protocol for their specific delayed endoscope processing procedures.

-   **Delayed processing:** Cleaning instructions for endoscopes that have not been processed within an hour after the completion of point of use treatment.

Transporting Soiled Endoscopes

Preparing flexible endoscopes is important to prevent damage to the endoscope and cross contamination. Treated endoscopes should be placed in a leakproof, puncture proof transport container. Again, the endoscope should be loosely coiled because tightly coiling flexible endoscopes will damage the device.

Accessories, such as water bottles and biopsy forceps, should always be placed in a separate container. The container should then be sealed for transport. Containers should be properly labeled as a biohazard so others will know there are soiled items within the container.

**Label the container with hand off information to include:**

-   Patient identifier
-   Procedure date
-   Time point of use treatment was completed
-   Any other pertinent information

Leak Testing

The majority of flexible endoscopes require a leak test be performed prior to submerging the device during cleaning and prior to HLD or sterilization. A leak test is necessary to ensure that the endoscope is watertight. A leaky endoscope should not be used on any patient, as the endoscope cannot be properly disinfected or sterilized, and chemicals or body fluids from the previous patient can potentially leak into the next patient. Fluid invasion will also damage the endoscope. Follow the IFU for each specific type and model of endoscope to ensure the proper type of leak testing is performed.

**Note**: Most endoscope manufacturers require the use of specific leak testers. Ensure the test is performed using the correct tool.

Endoscopes that require leak testing must be tested each time the endoscope is used or processed. Be sure each leak tester is tested for proper function at least daily. Leak testers should undergo pressure verification each day that endoscopes are used. Any endoscope that fails a leak test should be removed from service.

Follow the IFU for further processing and send the endoscope to the manufacturer or an authorized repair company for service. Report the leak test failure according to facility policies and procedures and include the endoscope product identification and traceability information.

Cleaning Steps for Flexible Endoscopes

The following are general recommendations for cleaning a flexible endoscope. Always consult the endoscope manufacturer's IFU for specific information pertaining to each endoscope's make and model.

-   Thoroughly rinse the endoscope with water to remove all gross debris
-   Detach all removable parts (valves) and completely immerse the endoscope and valves in a solution recommended by the manufacturer
-   Using a syringe or the manufacturer's supplied irrigation tubes, fill channels with cleaning solution
-   Keep the endoscope immersed for the time recommended by the manufacturer
-   While immersed, use a soft, clean, non linting cloth or approved sponge to wipe the exterior of the endoscope. Use a soft bristle brush to clean the valves and any crevices of the endoscope. Be sure to use the correctly sized brush for the lumen's opening
-   Insert a long, flexible brush into the channel at the proximal end of the endoscope. Be sure it is the correct diameter to clean the channel
-   Carefully push the brush through until it exits the distal end. Rinse the brush bristles to remove debris and fully pull the brush back through the channel
-   Rinse the brush again and repeat until the brush remains clean after passing through the channel. Consult the IFU for any special brushing instructions

After the immersion period, remove the endoscope and valves from the cleaning solution and completely immerse them in fresh water per the IFU. Be sure to flush all of the channels with water to remove the cleaning solution. Repeat the rinsing process using fresh water as recommended by the device manufacturer

Alcohol and Endoscope Drying

In the past, alcohol was used as a drying agent. This process is no longer recommended because alcohol can act as a **fixative** if the endoscope is not completely clean. It is recommended to use pressure regulated, forced instrument air or, at minimum, high efficiency partial air.

-   **Fixative:** A substance used to keep things in position or stick them together. A chemical substance used to preserve or stabilize biological material for examination.

Endoscopes must be dried thoroughly to prevent the growth of microorganisms. External components can be dried with a clean, soft, non linting cloth. Consult the device manufacturer's IFU for specific internal drying instructions.

Cleaning Verification and Inspection

An endoscope that appears clean can still harbor debris. Cleaning verification is used to detect whether residual organic soil and microbial contamination were removed. Cleaning verification is performed after endoscope cleaning and before disinfection or sterilization. Visual inspection involves examining the internal and external components of the endoscope to ensure all areas of the endoscope have been cleaned. Helpful tools used in visual inspection include lighted magnification for external components and borescope examination of internal structures and lumens.

Cleaning verification tests include protein, carbohydrate, hemoglobin or blood, and adenosine triphosphate or A T P. Inspection using a borescope allows for visualization of the internal working channels to identify damage and residual soil and contaminants. An endoscope that has failed a cleaning verification test should be recleaned and retested. If an endoscope is suspected of having damage, it should be removed from service and sent to an appropriate repair service for evaluation.

High Level Disinfection

HLD is the minimum biocidal requirement for endoscopes. ANSI AAMI ST91, now states that flexible endoscopes should be sterilized when possible. Always refer to the specific endoscope manufacturer's IFU for the proper HLD information for each make and model.

Sterilization of Flexible Endoscopes

Package and sterilize the endoscope following the manufacturer's IFU. Some flexible endoscopes that are sterilized using low­ temperature sterilants may require a venting cap during sterilization.

**Note**: Always be sure to use the appropriate sterilization method and cycle.

Storing Endoscopes

Proper storage of endoscopes is an important part of endoscope processing to ensure the devices are safe for patient use. Before being placed into storage, endoscopes should be identified as patient ready to distinguish processed endoscopes from non processed endoscopes.

**The patient ready label or tag is attached to the patient ready endoscope with information that includes:**

-   Processing date
-   Names of the persons who performed the processing as specified by facility policy
-   Expiration date, based on the facility's established risk assessment, if applicable.

**Two types of endoscope storage cabinets are recommended for processed endoscopes:**

-   **Drying cabinets:** should be Closed cabinets designed for storage of flexible endoscopes that circulate HEPA filtered or instrument air through the cabinet and each endoscope channel at continuous positive pressure.
-   **Conventional cabinets:** Are Those that circulate HEPA filtered or instrument air through the cabinet at continuous positive pressure, but do not include forced air through endoscope channels.

There are specific requirements for storing endoscopes, depending on the type of storage cabinet used. Refer to the facility's policy and the manufacturer's IFU for proper storage information.

Sterilized endoscopes are stored like all other sterilized trays.

Transporting Processed Endoscopes

When removing endoscopes from storage, they must be protected from contamination and damage. Before removing endoscopes from the storage cabinet, hand hygiene must be performed and new, clean, non latex gloves must be worn. The patient ready label stays attached to communicate to the patient care team that the endoscope is safe for use. During transport to the point of use, the endoscope should be protected from contamination and damage. The endoscope should be loosely coiled and placed in a clean container that is large enough to accommodate a single endoscope.

Carrying Cases

The carrying case used to transport endoscopes outside the healthcare environment should not be used to store an endoscope or transport the instrument within the facility. The use of disposable carrying cases may be a better practice than using a reusable case.

**Flexible Endoscope Accessories**

Water Bottle Precautions

The water in an endoscope's water bottle is sprayed through the water channel to the patient's internal organs. For this reason, the bottle must be cared for properly. The water bottle should be sterilized at least once a day, ideally, after each use. Only sterile water should be used to fill the bottle, and water should never be stored in the water bottle overnight. Clean and sterilize the water bottle per the manufacturer's IFU.

Flexible Endoscope Instruments

All reusable flexible endoscope instruments should be carefully cleaned following the manufacturer's IFU. These items usually come in contact with sterile membranes, so they must be sterilized prior to use.

ENDOSCOPE RELATED INFECTION PREVENTION

Effective infection prevention policies and practices are critical for minimizing or eliminating endoscope related cross contamination. Flexible endoscopes are particularly challenging for infection control. Their long, dark and narrow lumens pose a processing concern because they are not directly accessible and are extremely difficult to clean. In addition, if channels are not thoroughly dried after processing and are stored wet, they become a dark and damp environment that is suitable for bacterial growth.

ENDOSCOPE CAMERA CARE AND HANDLING

**Endoscope cameras are complex and delicate devices.**

**Camera Cleaning**

The manufacturer's IFU should be followed to help ensure proper care and handling of the camera, including cleaning. The use of improper chemicals is a major contributor to premature failure of external components. In general, cameras should be precleaned in the operating or procedure room to remove gross debris and then transported to the decontamination area as quickly as possible to prevent drying of debris, again, ideally within 60 minutes of the end of the procedure. An inspection of the camera should be performed to closely examine the camera cable for any cuts, nicks or other damage.

**Important Note**: A damaged camera should not be used in any procedure. It should be removed from service and sent for repair.

Cleaning is performed using a soft, non linting cloth and solution recommended in the IFU. Particular attention must be paid to the camera window.

Camera Inspection

Every manufacturer's cameras are unique to the company; therefore, inspection of each camera make and model must be done by carefully following the camera's specific IFU. Disinfection and/or sterilization processes must always be performed with strict adherence to the manufacturer's IFU.

STAFF EDUCATION

SP technicians working with complex medical instrumentation, such as endoscopes, must be thoroughly trained in proper processing protocols. Competency should be performed annually.

IMPLANTABLE DEVICES

Implantable devices (implants) are used in many types of surgeries. Implants can be a simple k wire, a breast implant, total joint, spacers or plates, and screws. While there is a movement toward receiving implants that are already sterile, many implants are still received unsterile and need to be carefully processed. IFU must be reviewed for each type of implant because there are different processing instructions for many implantable devices. Most implants cannot be run through an automated process with a lubrication cycle as lubricants may interfere with the patient's recovery.

When sterilizing an implant, the load must contain a biological indicator or Bl and should not be released prior to reading the Bl results after incubation.

Implants removed from patients are called explants. The facility should have a policy on whether or not an explant can be returned to the patient because a damaged explant often needs to be returned to the manufacturer. As with all other surgical devices, explants should be properly cleaned and decontaminated prior to returning these items to a patient. Many times, due to the difficulty of properly cleaning these devices, there will be no manufacturer's IFU for the proper cleaning protocols.

THREE DIMENSIONAL DEVICES

One of the newest types of devices being used today are three dimensional 3D devices. These devices can be created and customized for specific sets or even a specific patient. Because these are custom made devices and may be created from different materials, it is very important to follow the manufacturer's IFU for each processing step. Sterilization is also varied with these devices based on the materials used to create the specific device.

LOANED INSTRUMENTATION

As the name implies, **loaned instrumentation** is instrumental ion loaned from a vendor for a specific case or procedure. Loaned instrumentation comes for many specialties, and each represents different challenges pertaining to ordering, receiving, decontamination, assembly, sterilization, storage and return of the borrowed items. Loaned instrumentation, once primarily used in orthopedic and neurosurgical specialties, is now used in almost all surgical and procedural specialties.

**Facilities borrow instrumentation from manufacturers, distributing vendors and even other healthcare organizations because:**

The cost of the instrumentation to perform relatively few procedures can be prohibitive

More specialty cases are being performed than what the facility's instrument inventory can support

A physician or surgical specialty wants to trial the new instruments or technology

-   **Loaned instrumentation: are** Instruments or sets borrowed from a vendor or other facility for emergency or scheduled surgical procedures that will be returned following use.

Loaned instrumentation may be received as one instrument or as numerous trays for a specific procedure. Each instrument requires special attention during processing.

As the concept of borrowing instruments continues to grow, departments may receive several hundred trays in one clay. Many of these instruments require special disassembly, cleaning and assembly protocols, which makes them a challenge for most SPDs. It is important to have loaned instruments delivered with enough time to properly process them for scheduled procedures. After the procedure, enough time must be allocated to properly clean and decontaminate the instruments prior to returning them to the loaning vendor or facility.

Loaned Receipt and Inventory Procedures

Loaned instruments may be received at the facility in several different ways. Company representatives may personally deliver the instruments, or the)' may also arrive *by* next day carriers, U.S. mail and local courier services. This makes managing the process difficult. Policies and procedures need to be in place, so standard practices are followed when receiving, handling and returning these expensive instruments.

SP technicians should log the receipt of loaned instrumentation and implants per facility policy. As soon as possible after receipt, loaned instruments should be inspected. This process should be done with the vendor representative present, whenever possible. Damaged and missing instruments should be documented, the user area should be notified, and the representative should arrange for immediate replacement. Because the quality of the previous cleaning is unknown, gloves should be worn during the inspection process.

When completed properly, an inventory control sheet provides valuable information to protect the facility and the vendor. Many times, the inventory control sheet is a preprinted inventory list provided by the vendor, or it may be a custom sheet designed by the facility.

Responsibility for the instruments should not be taken until the above procedures are completed, as the facility will be responsible for lost or damaged instruments.

Decontamination of Loaned Instrumentation

All loaned instruments should be cleaned and decontaminated upon their receipt and after use. Instruments that appear clean (even those received in sterilized containers or wrap) should be considered contaminated and must be properly processed. Each manufacturer has specific instructions about the type of solutions, temperature, and mechanical cleaning method to be used.

Loaned Instrument Inspection and Assembly

After cleaning and decontamination, SP technicians must inspect each device for cleanliness and functionality and then assemble and prepare the loaned instrumentation for sterilization. Each instrument should be examined for residual bioburden and for any defects that might cause the device to malfunction. Defective instruments should be documented and reported to the appropriate supervisor to prevent delays in scheduled procedures. Loaned instruments should be packaged according to the manufacturer's IFU.

Each manufacturer establishes instructions for the sterilization of their instruments and sets. These instructions are based, in part, on the tray configuration and the complexity of the instrumentation. Facilities must follow the sterilization times and temperatures established by the manufacturer to help ensure sterilization of the loaned instruments.

Loaned Instrument Handling and Storage

After the loaned instruments have been sterilized, they should be moved to a department area with low traffic and allowed to cool away from the direct airflow of cooling vents.

**Note**: Trays should not be handled until properly cooled, which could take several hours.

After cooling, trays should be handled as little as possible to prevent contamination or damage to the wrap. Care should be used when handling and moving the trays after they have cooled. These trays are often heavy, and their packaging may be easily compromised or torn if not handled properly. Never slide these trays across a surface; always lift the trays and set them on storage shelves or case carts for use in the OR.

Sometimes, instruments are loaned to a facility for an extended period. These instruments should be stored in a protected area to decrease the potential of instrument loss or damage.

Loaned Instrument Return

After the loaned instrument trays have been used in the procedure, they must be processed. Each instrument should be carefully cleaned and decontaminated according to manufacturer's instructions prior to releasing them to the vendor representative or before sending the trays back via courier or shipping company. Vendor representatives may be in a hurry to take the instruments to another facility. Regardless, all instruments must be thoroughly cleaned and decontaminated prior to their release.

An exit inventory of all loaned instruments is recommended to help ensure that any missing or damaged instrumentation is identified in a timely manner.

In CONCLUSION.

As technology advances, surgical instruments and equipment will become more complex, and this has been evident within many surgical specialties. SP technicians will continue to be challenged with staying current with new technologies.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Endoscope**
-   **Light emitting diode or LED**
-   **Delayed processing**
-   **Fixative**
-   **Loaned instrumentation**

This concludes chapter 11. Thank you
