Chapter 12.

**Preparation and Packaging.**

Learning Objectives

As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to Explain the setup and function of the assembly area

1.  Review basic procedures to prepare pack contents for packaging
2.  Explain the basic objectives of the packaging process
3.  Provide an overview of reusable packaging materials
4.  Provide an overview of disposable packaging materials
5.  Discuss basic package closure methods

INTRODUCTION

When instruments have been cleaned, they are transferred to the **preparation and packaging** area of the Sterile Processing department. This area is also known as the prep and pack or assembly area and is where instruments are inspected to ensure they are clean and in good working order before they are packaged for sterilization. This is a critical step because it is the final time the instruments will be handled before being dispensed to the Operating Room or other user areas.

Potentially serious problems can arise if a defective or unclean instrument arrives in the user department. When these incidents are detected, delays occur. When they are not detected, risks to the patient increase; therefore, it is imperative that protocols for inspection, assembly and packaging are followed at all times. Like other areas of the SPD, attention to detail is critical in the assembly area. SP technicians working in this part of the department must understand the configuration of their work area and the specific requirements that must be followed to work safely and effectively in that area.

-   **Preparation and packaging: is** A clean area of the SPD where instrument inspection, assembly and packaging are performed. The preparation and packing area is sometimes called the prep and pack or assembly area.

PREPARATION AND PACKAGING AREA

**Physical Environment**

The preparation and packaging area is a designated clean area, and meticulous care must be taken to maintain that cleanliness. Airflow plays a critical role in keeping the prep and pack area clean and free of contaminants. Air pressure in the prep and pack area should be positive. The purpose of this positive airflow is to ensure that when the doors to the prep and pack area are opened, air flows outward instead of into the work area. Positive airflow reduces the risk of airborne bacteria being introduced into the area.

Maintaining proper temperature is also critical. The healthcare organization monitors the prep and pack room temperature and humidity based on ANSI ASH RAE ASHE 170 when the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) system was initially installed or last upgraded.

Environmental Services (EVS) standards for the assembly area should be the same as those for delivery rooms and the OR. To reduce the number or bacteria in the area, all fixtures, worktables and furniture should be constructed of non-porous, easy-to­ clean materials. In addition to routinely cleaning surfaces, care must be taken to minimize dust and lint in the area. Dust and lint may settle on pack contents and be introduced into the patient's body during a procedure. Workstations should be cleaned at least once each shift and as they become soiled.

The Danger of Lint

Lint is comprised of fine fibers that separate from items such as wraps, textiles, paper and more. Lint can be carried on air currents and deposited anywhere. Microorganisms often adhere to lint. When lint is introduced into the sterile field, it can settle into a wound and cause infection.

SPDs should make every effort to minimize lint. Good cleaning practices and compliance with attire and EVS protocols can reduce lint and the chance of it entering the OR.

To further maintain environmental cleanliness, hand hygiene stations should be conveniently located and readily accessible to all SP staff. Hand hygiene should be performed frequently in this area.

Dress Code and Personal Behaviors

Personal cleanliness and adherence to dress code is essential for preventing microorganisms and contaminants from entering the work area. The cleaner the environment, the less chance there is of contaminants entering a pack.

Nail polish and artificial nails should not be worn in the prep and pack area because there is a potential for nail polish to chip and artificial nails to fall off. Natural fingernails should be clean and kept at a length that does not extend beyond the fingertips. Long nails harbor bacteria that *may* hinder effective handwashing.

According to A N S I AAM I ST79. Which is a Comprehensive guide to steam sterilization and sterility assistance in health care facilities, states that all head and facial hair except for eyebrows and eyelashes should be completely covered with a surgical type hair covering.

**Note:** Bennis and mustaches must be covered using an approved beard cover. all types of jewelry, including wedding bands and wristwatches should not be worn in the area because they can harbor microorganisms.

All staff members in the area must monitor their cleanliness and change scrub attire if it becomes soiled. SP technicians should not bring items into the area that may contaminate hands including money, personal items and personal electronics.

**Note**: SP personnel should consult their facility's policy about the use of personal electronics and how it relates to infection prevention. Studies have shown that personal items contain a high microbial load.

Traffic Control and Environmental Management

Everyone assigned to the preparation and packaging areas should be mindful and protective of that clean environment. Traffic should be restricted, and traffic control requirements must be followed. Care must be taken to ensure that items that may serve as vehicles for microorganisms are not allowed into the area.

Food and beverages are not allowed in the preparation and packaging area. Food and drinks may attract insects and rodents, and residues left on hands after eating may transfer to instruments and impede the sterilization process. Personal behaviors, such as following dress code, performing proper hand hygiene and avoiding situations that pose a threat of contamination, all help protect the patient.

Personal items, such as electronics, cell phones and tablets, are discouraged from being used in the SPD. There are circumstances, however, when facility-issued electronics are brought into the department; these devices should be cleaned according to the device manufacturer's instructions for use and facility policy before these items are brought into the SPD. Cleaning these devices and implementing hand hygiene reduces the numbers of microorganisms present on the devices, thus protecting the SP environment.

Work Area Requirements

The work area in preparation and packaging should be adequately sized to perform inspection, testing and assembly duties. Supplies needed for those processes should be readily available. Equipment, such as computers, printers and specialized instrument testing devices, should also be readily available. The work area should be routinely cleaned to reduce bacteria and lint.

PRIMARY GOALS OF PACK PREPARATION

SP technicians assigned to the preparation and packaging area must understand the primary goals of creating an instrument pack. The first goal is to create a pack that meets users' needs.

The acronym FAN, which stands for functional, accurate and neat, can help reinforce that goal.

-   **Functional:** Each item in the pack must function as it was designed. This means that scissors must be sharp, clamps must hold securely, and multi-part items must be complete and functional when assembled. Technicians reach that goal by understanding how instruments operate and by relying on specific test methods to ensure they work properly.
-   **Accurate:** Instruments must be correct, and quantities must be exact. Technicians meet this goal by learning to identify specific instruments, working from an up-to-date pack count sheet and verifying that all specifications for the pack, including quantities and configuration, are correct.
-   **Neat:** Pack contents must be organized, and instruments must be easy to locate. Disorganized packs may waste time or delay treatment and care.

The FAN Principle

When assembling any pack for sterilization, remember the **"FAN"** principle. All items must be functional, accurate and neat.

In addition to creating organized packs that contain correct and functional instruments, SP technicians must also arrange pack contents in a manner that facilitates the appropriate sterilization process. As technicians arrange pack contents, they must also take precautions to protect instruments from possible damage or content shifting that may occur during handling and transport.

Technicians must then adhere to the packaging method recommended by the instrument manufacturers-one that is appropriate for the sterilization method that will be used for the items being packaged. Finally, technicians must use the proper packaging technique, as instructed by the manufacturer.

GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF PACK CONTENTS

Most instruments are prepared in groups called packs, sets, trays or kits.

**Note**: The specific name kit, tray, set or pack is determined by the healthcare facility.

Smaller groups of instruments used for minor procedures in areas outside of the OR are often called procedure trays also known as floor trays. No matter which type of tray is being assembled, and regardless of its size, preparation of pack contents begins with planning.

Clearly written, illustrated and standardized count sheets should be readily available and used by all personnel. Count sheets provide specific information that help ensure all packs are assembled, packaged and sterilized according to exact specifications. Pack standardization helps ensure packs are organized and uniform so users can quickly locate contents.

Item requirements for tray contents are usually identified by users. For example, a surgeon and OR staff would determine the contents of specific surgical trays. Pack content information may be collected and maintained in a manual or computerized system.

**Whichever method is used, the same basic information is provided to the assembler includes:**

-   Correct and complete name of the tray
-   A detailed list of tray contents, including item quantities, sizes and catalog or reference numbers
-   Essential steps for preparation and inspection, including assembly and disassembly of devices according to the manufacturer's written directions and or specifications.
-   Specific instructions for correct placement of items in the tray
-   Sterilization method and required cycle used for processing the tray
-   Type and placement of internal and or external chemical process indicators
-   Destination or storage location of the tray

Pack Assembly

Before items can be assembled into trays, sets or packs for sterilization, they must be inspected-and in some cases, tested to ensure that they are clean, dry, correct and functional.

Inspection Guidelines

It is imperative to inspect for cleanliness. Even though instruments have been cleaned, there may still be instances where some soil was not removed. Organic material, such as blood or other contaminants, will interfere with sterilization and optimal functioning. Inspecting instruments for cleanliness adds a safeguard to the process by reducing the chance that a soiled instrument will be delivered to a user area.

**Types and sizes of packaging to be used**

If a soiled instrument is detected during the inspection process, it should be sent back to the decontamination area for proper cleaning. The tray in which the soiled instrument was located should also be sent back to the decontamination area because other instruments may have also been contaminated through contact with the unclean instrument.

**Note**: Do not attempt to clean the instrument in the assembly area. Doing so may contaminate the immediate area and may cross-contaminate other areas of the department.

Ensure all instruments are dry unless otherwise indicated in the IFU.

Inspect for damage. Instruments may become damaged through use, misuse, transport and processing. Look for cracks, breaks, bent tips, misalignment and other signs of damage.

Inspect for signs of wear. Even with the best of care, instruments eventually begin to show signs of wear. Scissors and other sharp instruments become dull, surfaces break down, springs may weaken, screws may loosen, and moving parts may begin to slick.

**Damaged and worn instruments** should be removed and sent for repair or discarded as necessary. The continued use of broken or excessively worn instruments could put patients and facility personnel at risk.

Multi-part instruments also must be checked carefully. Instruments that have been dissembled for cleaning should be reassembled and tested for functionality, then disassembled again for sterilization.

**Note**: Small parts, such as wing nuts, should be placed in an approved containment device.

When placing disassembled instruments inside the tray, keep all parts near one another, so they can be readily accessible for the user.

**Assembly technicians should also ensure that the following information is available and followed:**

-   Specific instructions for correct placement of items in the tray
-   Sterilization method and required *cycle* used for processing the tray
-   Types and sizes of packaging to be used
-   Type and placement of internal and or external chemical process indicators
-   Destination or storage location of the tray

Testing

All instruments must be inspected before assembly. Some instruments must also be tested. For example, scissors should be tested for sharpness and the insulation of electrosurgical instruments must be tested for integrity between uses. The instrument shaft should be inspected for cuts, cracks and nicks. The handle should be inspected for chips or cracks. The insulation should fit tightly against the metal collar at the distal end of the instrument.

-   **Demagnetizers:** Occasionally, instruments may become magnetized. This is a source of frustration for the surgeon, especially with needle holders, as magnetization may make working with suture needles very difficult. Demagnetizers work by reversing the magnetic field away from the instrument.
-   **Tools for inspection:** There are many tools available to help with instrument inspection. Lightened magnification, computer magnifiers, and borescopes can enlarge areas to help detect residual soil, wear and damage.
-   **Photographs**: Photos of instruments and instrument configuration can help ensure that items are assembled correctly.
-   **Instrument identification:** Instrument scanning systems, approved instrument marking systems and instrument tape can help SP technicians identify devices and assist with pack assembly.

**Instrument holding trays:** are Groups of instruments for a specific procedure or specialty are contained together in trays specifically designed to protect the devices and facilitate the sterilization process. Other instrument groups are contained in trays that can be adapted to several configurations. ln most cases, the container is selected when the instrument tray is put into the surgical instrument system.

**The following are points to consider when using instrument holding trays:**

-   **Use the holding tray correctly:** Read the manufacturer's IFU and use the tray as instructed. Failure to do so can damage instruments or cause the sterilization process to fail. For example, trays with silicone finger mats must be aligned with drainage holes to help ensure air and water removal.
-   **Do not overcrowd the holding tray:** Overcrowding often occurs when instruments are added to an existing tray. Over time, physicians' needs may change, and instruments may be added to trays, creating a situation where the holding tray is too small for its contents. When this happens, there is a greater risk of instruments becoming damaged. In some cases, severe overcrowding may negatively affect sterilization and drying.
-   **Don't create overweight trays:** Be aware of tray weight and density recommendations from the manufacturers of sterilizers, instruments and packaging systems. In addition to possible issues associated with heat-up and drying, excessive tray weight can present ergonomic challenges for those who must lift the trays. ANSI AAM I ST77 Containment devices for reusable medical device sterilization and ANSI AAM I ST79, a Comprehensive guide to steam sterilization and sterility assurance in health care facilities recommend a maximum weight of 25 pounds for containerized trays; this includes both the weight of the instruments and the instrument container.
-   **Protect instruments from damage:** All instruments should be protected from damage when handled. Delicate and sharp instruments are of special concern. Sharp points may be protected with special holders, commercially available tip guards, silicone mats, holding brackets, posts or foam sleeves. Suppliers of protective devices should be consulted to ensure that the devices are permeable to the sterilant being used. For example, latex tubing should not be used to protect instrument tips, as **it** may prevent the sterilant from making direct contact with the instruments.
-   **Instruments that open:** such as scissors and hemostats, should be kept in an unlocked or unlatched and opened position to enable the sterilant to reach all parts. Devices, such as stringers and racks, can be purchased to keep hinged instruments open. Always follow the manufacturer's IFU for specific requirements.
-   **Protect the alignment of forceps tips:** by placing all tips in the same direction. Forceps tips can also be protected by using an approved containment device.

The most important thing to remember with all pack preparation is that all items must be functional, accurate and organized because the next time the pack is accessed, it will be used for patient care.

**Assembly Procedures**

Pack contents and pack configurations are unique. SP technicians must apply basic principles to pack assembly to create packs that can be successfully sterilized and meet the users' needs.

The following section provides an overview of general assembly guidelines.

**Procedure Trays**

Procedure trays are used in patient care settings, such as nursing units, and in procedure areas like Radiology and Emergency Departments. Procedure trays are often designed to include all or most of the items needed for a minor procedure. It is important to disassemble multi-part items and place all items in trays in a manner that prevents air entrapment and pooling of condensate during the sterilization process.

In the past, the inclusion of disposable single use items, such as needles, scalpel blades and suture, in trays was common; however, today, this practice is not recommended. To sterilize single use items, the manufacturer's IFU, including the re sterilization instructions must be kept on file and carefully followed. If the manufacturer's instructions for re-sterilization of a single-use item cannot be obtained, the item should not be included inside an in house sterilized procedure tray. If approved single-use items are sterilized in the healthcare facility, they must not be re-sterilized if they are returned unused.

Gauze sponges and surgical huck towels were also commonly used in procedure trays in the past. Now, many studies show that lint from these items can be transferred to a patient wound, even in minor procedures causing complications such as blood clots or infection. Prepackaged sterile towels purchased from an outside vendor or processed in house should not be opened and used on trays because they may **super heat** within the sterilization cycle. If super heating occurs, the tray they are in and other trays within the load will potentially be unsterile.

Towels should be laundered after sterilization to rehydrate the fibers prior to sterilization. Prepackaged sterile towels from an outside vendor should not be laundered unless the IFU have been obtained from the towel manufacturer. These towels are usually made of lower- quality material, which makes them single use and not meant for re laundering.

-   **Super-heated steam:** Occurs when dry steam becomes too hot compared to saturated steam; dry steam rises to a temperature higher than the boiling point of saturated steam. This commonly occurs when dehydrated linen is processed in a steam sterilizer. Due to the lack of moisture, dry steam is not an effective sterilant and will often char or burn items in the sterilizer.

**Instrument Trays**

As with procedure trays, each instrument tray should have a detailed count sheet available during instrument assembly. Technicians should never try to assemble an instrument tray from memory because contents may change and items could easily be forgotten.

Technicians should avoid counting total tray contents as a method of assembling instrument trays. and counting a total of 100 instruments instead of verifying each type of instrument needed. Each instrument should be identified, inspected, verified against the count sheet and placed properly in the tray.

Standardization of the instrument arrangement within each tray is important. Instrument trays should look the same, regardless of which technician assembled them. This saves time and reduces stress for the user. The order or arrangement in the tray should be determined by the SP manager and user department personnel.

It is important to note that SP technicians must place the required number of instruments in the tray. Placing too few or too many in the tray will disrupt the instrument count and may delay a surgical procedure while the needed instruments are located. Instrument substitutions should not occur, unless approved by the user department. If packaging an incomplete instrument tray is unavoidable, the users should be notified, and the tray should be clearly marked to indicate what is missing.

Instruments of the same type should be arranged together to facilitate their location during an emergency. Hinged instruments may be grouped together on racks, tray pins or stringers to ensure that instruments with locks or ratchets are maintained in the open position. Heavier items must be placed at the bottom of the tray to avoid damage to more delicate instruments. Delicate instruments should be protected using items such as approved foam pouches, tip protectors, silicon mats, holding brackets, or posts.

Instrument protectors should be approved by the manufacturer for the type of sterilization method to be used. Instruments that could hold condensate should be placed in a way that allows the condensate to run out during the sterilization process.

The use of approved towels or tray liners for cushioning instruments or wicking should be determined based on the metal mass in the tray and the external package manufacturer's IFU.

Gauze sponges should never be used as additional packaging wicking material in trays or packs. Surgical staff count gauze sponges during procedures, and their counts must be exact. Introducing additional sponges into the OR as packaging material may cause confusion and affect sponge counts, or they may be inadvertently inserted into the patient's operative site and accidentally retained. Retained surgical items can cause damage to surrounding tissue, lead to infections, and cause irreputable damage to the patient.

Sterilant penetration or weight distribution concerns may prevent the perfect tray arrangement requested by the user department. SP managers should inform user department personnel about sterilization limitations. The ultimate goal must always be to create a tray that can be successfully sterilized.

**Powered Surgical Instruments**

Manufacturer instructions should always be followed when preparing powered surgical instruments for sterilization. This includes the use of the correct disassembly and lubrication procedures. Trigger handles should be placed in the safety position, and power switches should be turned off before placing the instruments in the tray.

Powered surgical instruments often use a sterilization container supplied by the manufacturer. After items are inspected, disassembled and placed in a container according to the manufacturer's instructions, the tray is ready to be packaged for sterilization.

**Specialty Instruments**

Specialty instruments, such as laparoscopic instruments, robotics, endoscopes and cameras, are of special concern for SP technicians. Manufacturers' IFU must be carefully followed to ensure that proper disassembly, assembly and sterilization procedures are completed. Some instrument IFU state the specific number of times the item can undergo sterilization.

**Single Instruments**

The term single instrument is used to describe instruments that are to be packaged alone; it can also refer to like instruments packaged together, a single Mayo scissors or a package of two Kelly clamps. These instruments should be assembled according to the department's established protocols for the size and number of instruments.

**Surgical Supplies**

Numerous non-instrument surgical supplies, such as cotton balls and dressings, may be required by users. Most of these items are available as commercially sterilized products, and it is often more cost effective to purchase them pre sterilized.

If the facility chooses to process them internally, these and similar items should be wrapped individually or in usable quantities based on the product manufacturer's IFU and the user's need. These items should not be sterilized without the manufacturer's IFU on file within the department. Due to the linting factor, most surgical supplies should not be sterilized inside trays or packs.

**Quality Assurance Measures**

Part of the assembly process for every pack includes a quality assurance test designed to measure sterilant penetration. Incorrect placement of pack contents, incorrect packaging methods or improper loading can impede the sterilization process by creating air pockets or barriers that can prevent the sterilant from penetrating the pack and making direct contact with the items inside. Internal **chemical indicators Cls** are designed to identify those issues before a pack is used.

**Chemical indicators Cls:** Devices used to monitor the presence or attainment of one or more of the parameters required for a satisfactory sterilization process.

A CI is a small, disposable test that helps the user verify that the pack contents were exposed to a sterilant. A Cl's color changes when exposed to the specific sterilant it is designed to detect; this provides a visual indication of the presence of sterilant in the pack. When the pack is opened at the point of use, it is checked by the user. Users will not use a pack that has a failed internal CI and will also not use a pack that does not contain a CI.

When used properly, the CI becomes a very important early warning that something may be wrong with some aspect of the sterilization process. Cls should be placed inside each pack in the area considered the least accessible by the sterilant being used. The location may or may not be in the center of the pack's contents. In some cases, multiple Cls may need to be used if multiple areas could pose a challenge for sterilant penetration. Multi-level trays should have a CI placed in the most difficult area for sterilant penetration on each level of the tray.

**Commonly used internal Cls include:**

-   **Type 4 multi-critical process variable indicators:** Designed to react to two or more of the critical process variables and are intended to indicate exposure to a sterilization process at stated values of the chosen critical process variables.
-   **Type 5 integrating indicators:** Designed to react to all critical parameters and be equivalent to or exceed performance requirements over a specified range of sterilization *cycles.* When used inside a **process challenge device  or PCD,** non­ implant loads *may* be released with the appropriate results indicated on the CI.
-   **Type 6 emulating indicators:** also called verification indicators or cycle-specific indicators, designed to react to all critical parameters of a sterilization cycle.
-   **Class 6 indicators:** are designed to be run within one specific cycle, like 270 degrees Fahrenheit, with a four minute exposure time. This is the only cycle in which this specific indicator may be used. 275 degrees Fahrenheit, three minute exposure cycle is to be run, an emulator specifically made for that cycle must be used.

**Note**: It is important to use the appropriate indicator for the intended method of sterilization and cycle.

-   **Process challenge device or PCD: is a specialty package** that simulates a predetermined set of conditions when used to test sterilizing agents.

BASIC PACKAGING PROCEDURES

Once items have been cleaned, dried, inspected and assembled, they are ready to be sterilized. In order to maintain their sterility, items must be packaged before they are sterilized.

Packaging allows the sterilant to enter and helps maintain the integrity (sterility) the sterile items until they are opened and used.

The following sections address packaging selection and application.

Overview of the Sterile Packaging Process

SP technicians must select the appropriate packaging material and apply it correctly to create a pack that can be sterilized successfully and maintain sterility until opened.

One can draw some comparisons between food packaging and sterile packaging. Both types of packaging must protect items and keep them from becoming contaminated before they are used. Both can be compromised in a way that affects the package's contents and makes them unsafe for use.

Some sterile packaging is designed with **tamper evident seals,** so users can tell if the package has been opened. Many food products use these tamper-evident seals on their packaging for the same reason. There are several packaging options for food products and sterile items, and not all types of packaging are appropriate for all items and processes. For example, soup could not be packaged in aluminum foil, carried to work and heated in a microwave oven. Sterile item packaging must also consider the sterilization process that will be used.

-   **Tamper evident seals: are used as a** Sealing method that allows users to determine if sterile packages have been opened, or contaminated and helps users identify packages that are unsafe for patient use.

Objectives of the Packaging Process

**There are three primary objectives for any sterilization packaging system. It must:**

-   Allow penetration of the chosen sterilant and be compatible with any other requirements of the specific sterilization process such as drying
-   Maintain the sterility of the package contents until the package is opened
-   Create a package that can be opened aseptically (without contaminating the contents)

    **Packaging systems must also:**

-   Have a sealing method that is tamper evident
-   Be non-toxic
-   Be non-linting
-   Be easy to use
-   Be cost effective

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration classifies sterilization packaging as a Class 2 medical device, a device that presents a potential risk. The consequences of using a nonsterile item during a surgical procedure can be life-threatening.

In addition to selecting and applying the appropriate packaging material, SP technicians must also be able to construct packages that allow the sterilization process to be successful and protect the package contents from contamination.

Selecting the Appropriate Packaging Material

The first step in the packaging process is selecting the appropriate packaging material and method. Different types of packaging are needed for alternative sterilization methods, and styles of packaging may vary based on package contents.

SP technicians must make good packaging choices. Only materials specifically designed for sterilization packaging and cleared by the FDA are acceptable.

In addition to selecting the appropriate packaging material, SP technicians must understand how to use sterilization packaging properly to achieve the desired results, sterilant penetration, barrier effectiveness and aseptic opening.

Packaging systems used in healthcare facility-based sterilization are generally classified into reusable packaging and disposable single use packaging materials. Each packaging system has advantages and limitations. The following sections provide some basic information about common packaging systems and their application.

REUSABLE PACKAGING MATERIALS

There are two basic types of reusable packaging material: woven fabric and rigid containers.

**Woven Fabric Materials**

**Muslin:** is a Type 140 cotton, calico, and barrier cloth are common names for fabric made of 100% unbleached, loosely woven cotton fibers. Muslin wrappers are generally made of two ply double thickness fabric fastened together as one wrap.

**Other woven fabrics used in sterilization are:**

-   Duck cloth
-   Twill
-   Treated barrier fabrics

**Note**: Canvas is not recognized as a packaging material because its tight weave impedes steam penetration and drying.

Textile packaging is still the packaging method of choice for some healthcare facilities. The selection of reusable textiles is often impacted by costs and or environmental sustainability concerns.

Textile packaging requires more labor because it must be laundered and inspected to ensure that there are no tears, punctures, worn spots, or stains from previous use. That inspection is performed using a light table that has a light source built into the tabletop to identify small holes and punctures. As the wrap is passed over the lighted tabletop, light shines through small holes and punctures, making them easier to identify.

-   If holes, punctures or worn spots are discovered, the linen wrap must be repaired using a heat-sealed patch designed to cover the hole. The size of the surface area covered by heat-sealed patches on reusable fabrics should be considered before the fabric is reused.
-   If stains are discovered, the wrap should be re-laundered. If stains cannot be removed, the wrap should be removed from service.

Textiles must also be de-linted as needed to minimize the risk of lint entering the sterile pack and, ultimately, the sterile field.

-   Reusable textiles can be a significant source of lint.
-   If lint enters a patient's incision, it may cause negative effects.

When assembling linen packs using textiles, refer to the textile and sterilizer IFU for size and weight restrictions, as these restrictions may differ from their single use counterparts.

Linen wrappers should be securely applied without compressing package contents. Contents must be packaged with sufficient spacing to allow the sterilant to reach all surfaces.

Tight packaging will not allow for fiber swelling or expansion, when expansion occurs, the sterilant will not penetrate the material. It is possible to wrap even a small pack so tightly that its density will be too great for adequate sterilant penetration.

Rigid Container Systems

**Rigid container systems:** are a box-like structures with scalable and removable lids. They are made of anodized aluminum, stainless steel, plastic or a combination of these materials. Rigid containers have lids and filters that allow sterilant penetration, while providing a microbial barrier.

Filters may be disposable, a synthetic spunbonded product, or reusable with ceramic filters or a valve system.

Rigid containers consist of an inner basket to hold the instruments and an outer container that acts as a protective barrier. Instruments should only be inside the basket, not outside the basket or resting on the container. Both the inner basket and outer container have handles for easier carrying. After placing the lid on the container, tamper evident locks must be applied.

-   **Rigid container system:** Instrument containers that hold medical devices during sterilization and also protect devices from contamination during storage and transport.

Some manufacturers of rigid container systems recommend that times for instrument sterilization, drying and aeration be extended when using their containers. It is important to consult the specific container manufacturer's IFU before using a rigid container system. The IFU specifies the type of sterilization modality to use and cycle type such as dynamic air removal and gravity. Rigid containers are regulated by the FDA.

When using sterilization containers, it is imperative to review and follow the IFU carefully. Not all sterilization containers can sterilize all medical devices; there may be restrictions related to density of materials, weight and distribution of contents.

**Other sterilization container restrictions include:**

-   Lumen size
-   Number of lumened devices
-   Types of material used
-   Stacking
-   Weight

Advantages and Disadvantages

**There are several advantages of rigid sterilization containers. They:**

-   Provide an excellent barrier to microorganisms
-   Are easy to use
-   Eliminate torn wrappers
-   Help protect instruments from damage during processing, storage and transport

There are also potential disadvantages to the use of rigid sterilization containers, including:

Safety concerns linked to ergonomics. Some large, empty containers weigh approximately seven to nine pounds. This requires SP technicians to use good body mechanics when lifting and moving containers.

Additional cycle time may be required to thoroughly dry the container - Sterilization efficacy is also impacted as a container's weight increases because of excess condensation. While it is difficult to generalize about specific causes of **wet packs,** it is known that heavier sets and those with greater metal mass are more likely to experience this problem, especially when instruments are not properly disbursed in the container.

Plastic containers may require longer dry times because they lack metal, which produces heat by conduction to help drying.

**Wet pack:** is a Package or container that contains moisture after the sterilization process is completed.

-   Additional space may be needed to store those containers that are larger than traditional wrapped containers.
-   Additional labor may be required since the containers must be cleaned between uses. This may also affect washer loads if a mechanical washer is used.
-   Latching mechanisms on containers create potential problems. When latches and welds break, the containers cannot be used. Also, sharp edges can injure employees.
-   Filter retention plates may become dislodged and contaminate instruments.

Cleaning and Inspection Procedures for Rigid Containers

To clean a rigid sterilization container, first remove its disposable filters or release its filter protector holder. Valve-type closures must be cleaned according to the manufacturer's written instructions. Interior baskets must be removed and cleaned. Dividers and pins may need to be removed if they interfere with the cleaning process.

Cleaning and rinsing instructions provided by the container manufacturer should be followed. Particular attention should be given to the type of detergent used. For example, some containers cannot be exposed to certain chemicals such as high alkaline solutions.

Inspection of rigid sterilization containers is necessary to detect flaws and wear that may interfere with the sterilization process or sterility maintenance. Inspection should also focus on the top and bottom valve or filter mechanism and the latching mechanism.

**For example:**

-   The filter retention plate should be intact and not bent; the retention plate should seat over the filter and securely lock into place
-   The surfaces and edges of the container and lid should be free of dents and chips
-   The retention post should be secure and not move

If using disposable filters, they should be checked for holes prior to placing them in the container. Filters should fit the space allotted, with no folding or crimping of edges. Filter material must be approved for the type of sterilization to be used

Only filters recommended by the container manufacturer should be used; filters cannot be altered or made from other materials

If using reusable valves, they should be clean and free of debris, with no breaks or chips in the valve mechanism

The lid gasket should be pliable, clean and free of cracks and nicks. There should be no ridges on the gasket

Rivets in the handle area should be checked to ensure that they are secured and not separating from the container. If loosened, they can become a safety hazard and a pathway for entry of bacteria

Handles should move up and down easily. Ensure the latch springs are in place and once locked, checked to ensure the latching mechanisms are functioning to maintain the seal.

As noted previously, the weight of instruments placed in the container is an important concern. The number of instruments placed in the tray must not exceed the quantity that can be effectively sterilized and dried

Rigid containers should be carried by both of their handles (not by the lid) to avoid breaking the container's seal or damaging the instruments inside

DISPOSABLE PACKAGING MATERIALS

Disposable or non-woven materials were introduced as engineered fabrics in the 1940s and have made their way into everyday life. Coffee filters, teabags, vacuum cleaner bags and disposable diapers are all examples of engineered fabrics also referred to as disposable non-woven materials. These materials are used in both disposable Flat wrap and rigid container filters.

Before using, both disposable flat wrap and rigid container filters should be inspected for tears or holes that may have occurred during transport and handling. Disposable non-woven materials are a popular choice for sterilization packaging because they have excellent barrier effectiveness and can be discarded after use. There are three types of disposable packaging materials in common use: paper, polyolefin plastic and disposable non-woven wrap.

**Important Note: Be Aware of Packaging Expiration Dates**

Some disposable packaging materials contain expiration dates from the manufacturer. It is important to check for an expiration date prior to using any disposable packaging material. The expiration date usually indicates a decrease in the packaging's ability to perform at optimal standards, including the packaging material's microbial barrier properties.

Paper is commonly used as sterilization packaging materials. It is important to ensure that the paper packaging is intended for use as sterilization packaging, and that it has been cleared by the FDA.

**Note**: Paper containing cellulose cannot be used in hydrogen peroxide sterilizers because cellulose absorbs the sterilant and reduces penetration. As this occurs, the contents being sterilizer may not be exposed to the proper amount of sterilant.

medical grade Kraft-type paper is generally smooth surfaced and is available in sizes to accommodate many medical devices and porous or soft-good items. Pouches of medical-grade paper specially formulated for sterilization are also available. Pouches with both sides consisting of Kraft-type paper can be used to hold small parts and instruments inside the instrument sets.

Kraft-type paper also known as crepe paper can also be purchased as flat wrap. These products may be utilized in steam and ethylene oxide EO sterilization but cannot be used with hydrogen peroxide.

Paper plastic and spunbonded polyolefin-plastic combinations called peel packs or peel pouches are the most commonly used packaging materials for small instruments and lightweight items. They are called peel pouches because after they are sealed, they must be peeled open for aseptic presentation.

**There are two basic types of combination peel pouches:**

Paper plastic combinations: These are typically acceptable for use with steam and EO sterilization processes. They are not compatible with hydrogen peroxide. As suggested by their name, they have a paper side and a plastic side. The plastic side allows visibility of the package contents, and the paper side allows sterilant penetration.

**Note**: Sterilant cannot enter through the plastic side, so proper positioning is important to achieve sterilization.

Spun bonded high-density polyethylene also known as HOPE combinations sometimes referred to as Tyvek pouches. These are used for low-temperature hydrogen peroxide sterilization. Like paper plastic combinations, they have a plastic side so package contents are visible. The other side is composed of polyolefin that contains no cellulosic materials and is, therefore, compatible with hydrogen peroxide sterilization processes.

**Important Note: Use Caution When Selecting Peel Pouches**

Paper plastic and spunbonded-polyolefin packages look alike. Paper plastic combinations are not compatible with hydrogen peroxide sterilization, and spunbonded­ polyolefin combinations will melt in high-temperature processes such as steam sterilization.

Flat wrap is another commonly used packaging material. Instead of inserting objects into a ready-made pouch and sealing it, flat wrap requires the user to "create" a barrier package using specific folding techniques.

One non-woven packaging material, spunbond meltblown spunbonded or SMS, is a popular flat wrap. It is made by a process in which polyolefin layers which are synthetic materials softened by heat and hardened by cooling are exposed to high heat and are pressure-bonded together to form sheets.

Flat wrapping products constructed of non-woven SMS fabrics for sterilization wrapping are designed as single-use disposable products and must never be reused. These materials are available in a range of weights and a wide variety of sizes. Flat wrap is also available as single- or double-sheet wraps that are bonded together.

The use of each packaging material has advantages and disadvantages. SP technicians must ensure that they select the type of packaging most suitable for the items being packaged and the type of sterilization selected. SP technicians can then begin preparing the package contents for packaging and the sterilization process to follow.

WRAPPING TECHNIQUES

**Peel Pouching Techniques**

Peel pouches are usually used for smaller, lightweight items and are useful when it is important to see inside the package. Peel pouches are available on rolls that allow SP technicians to cut off the length desired for each package; they are also available in precut sizes. Inserts or tip protectors help to protect a pouch's contents from damage and prevent the tips from penetrating the package. If inserts or tip protectors are used, ensure that the material is appropriate for the type of sterilization method to be used, and that it is nontoxic and free of non-fast dyes.

Before placing items in the peel pouch, carefully inspect the pouch to ensure there are no tears or holes. Items should be placed in the pouch so the end of the item to be grasped during presentation, with finger rings of an instrument will be presented first when the package is opened at the point of use.

Instrument tips should always face the plastic side of the package to avoid penetrating the paper side and contaminating the contents.

Hinged instruments must be packaged in a manner that keeps the instrument open for sterilization. This can be accomplished by using commercially purchased products.

Pouches must be sized and applied properly to allow for adequate air removal, sterilant penetration and drying.

To allow space for package contraction and proper circulation, leave about one inch, or 1 quarter of an inch per side of the package of space between the items in the pouch and the sealed edges. When packaging is too small, the packaged instruments cause stress on the sides of the pouch. Stress compromises the package's barrier and will likely rupture the side seams of the package during the harsh air removal and heat-up phases of the steam sterilization process or the high vacuum phase of the hydrogen peroxide sterilization process.

Items placed in packages that are too small can also rupture the seams during normal handling and transport. Pouches should not be too large because movement of the items inside the pouch may result in the contents sliding from side to side. The excessive movement of contents could break seals or puncture the pouch's paper. Pouches should not be overfilled because this can cause the paper to tear, or the seals to rupture during sterilization or handling.

Trapped air acts as a barrier to heat, moisture and sterilant penetration, so it is important to remove as much air as possible before sealing. To remove trapped air, gently push the pouch's top and bottom layers together, just prior to sealing.

**Note**: Applying too much pressure can damage the pouch.

Paper plastic pouches must only be labeled on the plastic side or on areas specifically provided by the manufacturer like fold-over paper flap seals. Writing on the paper side of the pouch will damage the package, which may not be noticeable but can compromise the barrier protection. Use only felt-tipped pens approved for writing on the plastic surface and for the sterilization method to be used. Using the wrong type of pen, such as a ballpoint pen, can damage packaging.

Pouches must be closed with a tamper-evident seal so there is no danger of packages being opened and resealed for later use. Package seals should be either a self-seal or heat seal. Sterilization tape should not be used because tape hinders aseptic removal. After a sterile package is opened, it is contaminated and may not be resealed and reused.

Most heat sealers have a temperature control. The temperature of the heat sealer is dependent on the type of packaging used, which is included in the packaging IFU. Paper plastic heat sealers function at a higher temperature than plastic Tyvek pouches.

There are two types of heat sealers available: lift sealers and continuous-feed heat sealers. Whichever is used, it must be kept in proper working condition to prevent the heat sealer from burning the package or from not thoroughly sealing the package. The heat sealer's IFU provides information regarding its care and maintenance. Verification testing devices are available to verify that the peel pouch seals are holding.

**Common ways that paper plastic and polyolefin-plastic packages can be used to meet specific packaging needs include:**

-   **Wrap within a pouch:** Sometimes, usually to accommodate unique sterile presentation issues, it is desirable to place a single-wrapped package into a pouch. The initial wrap is done using the flat wrap packaging and wrapping method. It is not necessary to seal the wrapped item. The wrapped item is then inserted into the appropriately sized pouch. The pouch should be sealed and labeled.

**Note**: The manufacturer's IFU for both the peel pouch and the flat wrap must be reviewed to see if this process is approved. Using this method if not approved by both manufacturers could result in an unsterile product.

-   **Double pouches:** While double pouching is not necessary for sterility maintenance, it may be required for aseptic presentation of multiple items or for instruments having more than one part. Before double pouching, the packaging manufacturer IFU should be reviewed for approval to double package. Double packaging should be performed using the same type of packaging.

Double pouches are prepared by placing the items into one paper plastic pouch and sealing it. This pouch is then placed inside another slightly larger pouch and sealed. Care is needed when selecting the appropriate sequential sizing. The same rules apply for the inside peel pouch as for pouching instruments, where you should leave about one quarter of an inch of space per every side of the package.

You should Never fold the inner pouch because doing so can interfere with air removal and sterilant penetration. Place the smaller inner package paper side to paper side and plastic side to plastic side to help ensure sterilant penetration, drying, and content visibility.

Flat-Wrapping Techniques

Flat-wrapping procedures are primarily used for large packages but may also be used for smaller items. These procedures involve using either reusable woven textiles (linens) or disposable non­ woven wraps.

**There are two methods of using flat wrap packs:**

-   **Sequential:** This style of package is wrapped twice and is a package within a package. The term sequential indicates that the contents have been wrapped in sequence, or one after the other. This method is used for muslin, Kraft-type paper and single layers of SMS wraps.
-   **Simultaneous:** This style of package is only wrapped once but requires a special, double-layered synthetic nonwoven material bound on two or four sides.

The advantage of sequential wrap is that it affords a "second chance" for sterile presentation. The disadvantages: sequential wrap requires more time for wrapping and unwrapping. The advantage of simultaneous wrap is reduced labor costs and increased output in the SPD and OR.

**There are also two techniques for wrapping packages, and both are used with the sequential and simultaneous wrap methods:**

-   **Square fold:** Also called the Parallel fold; is most frequently used for larger packs and instrument trays.
-   **Envelope fold:** This method is more commonly used for individual items, small packs and most instrument sets.

Regardless of the packaging system used, flat wrap should be inspected for holes and tears prior to use. Wrap must be free from holes, tears, abrasions or any other deviations that could allow bacteria to enter the package.

SP technicians are responsible for creating a package that will protect the contents and allow for sterilization and aseptic opening from flat sheets of wrapping material. This requires that every package be created according to specific protocols. The following photos illustrate the proper techniques for sequential and simultaneous wrapping in both the envelope and square styles.

A problem with wrapping instrument trays is that some trays may have sharp edges or corners that cause a hole in the package, thus rendering it unsterile. To prevent holes from sharp corners, tray corner guards may be used following IFU. They are used according to the manufacturers' IFU for the tray corners and the sterile barrier system.

The wrapper size should be selected to completely cover the items being packaged. The item is wrapped securely to prevent gapping, billowing, or the formation of air pockets, as these can prevent sterilant contact with the surface of the device or allow contaminates to penetrate the package. Packaging should not be cut to the size of the item; doing so alters a U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved device.

-   **Simultaneous wrapping:** uses two layers of synthetic nonwoven material such as SMS bound on two or four edges. Since the material is already double layered, the contents are only wrapped once. Both methods are acceptable, although one may be more appropriate for specific situations.

Choose the properly sized wrap for either method. The wrap must be large enough to completely contain the contents without leaving excess material that could inhibit sterilant penetration and release. Wrap must be snug but not so tight as to impede sterilant entry or exit. If the wrap will also be used to create a sterile field, it must be of sufficient size to extend at least six inches below the edge of the surface being covered.

Important Note: Be Consistent

Wrap folding must always be done in the same sequence. This allows the individuals opening sterile packages to establish a pattern, which conserves time and reduces the possibility of error.

METHODS OF PACKAGE CLOSURE

Overview

The purpose of a package closure is to seal the package securely, indicate that the package was processed, maintain the sterile integrity during storage and transport, and prevent resealing if the package is opened or the seal is compromised.

Acceptable Closure Methods

Only approved closure methods should be used to seal a sterile package. There are several types of package closures, and SP technicians must ensure they use the appropriate packaging closure method, including:

**Tape designated as indicator tape** is considered best practice because it is made specifically to withstand sterilization and change color after being exposed to the sterilization process. It does not, however, provide proof that adequate sterilization of package contents has occurred. Indicator tape or indicator stickers that change color after exposure should be used on every package to avoid mixing processed and unprocessed packages.

Specially manufactured elastomer bands or similar closures are only acceptable if the manufacturer of the wrap material explicitly recommends their use. If recommended, care is needed to select the properly sized bands that allow a snug fit, without creating excessive wrinkles or folds in the fabric that may impede sterilant penetration. If bands are used, the label or indicator stickers should be placed in such a way that any attempt to remove the band will damage the band and reveal the compromised status of the pack.

**Note**: Band applications are designed for specific packaging methods and should only be used as recommended by the specific bond manufacturer.

**Rigid container:** systems have tamper evident seals, which are secured to the outside of the container and lock the top and bottom of the container together.  Ensure the locks are securely in place prior to sterilization. Rigid container seals are designed to break when the seal on the container has been broken. Sterilization containers with broken locks must be reprocessed.

The most common types are plastic components that lock in place and must be broken to open the container. Small bands that tighten as they react to heat during sterilization can also be placed on certain types of rigid containers, and these will break when the seal of the container is broken.

Heat sealing is a peel pouch closure method. There are several varieties of heat sealers available. The manufacturer of the sealer and or pouch material must verify that the two are compatible. If they are not, the seal may not bond, or there may be burn-through; both actions will compromise the seal. Multiple-band or wide­ band heat sealers should be used to reduce the possibility of an incomplete seal.

The manufacturer's instructions for temperature settings, applied pressure and contact times should be written into procedures and always followed.

The package is placed inside the jaws of the heat sealer, and the two sides are fused together. Be sure to follow the heat sealer and packaging manufacturers' instructions to ensure appropriate exposure times and temperatures. Inadequate exposure times or temperatures may prevent proper sealing, and those that exceed recommendations may cause package damage. SP technicians should use extra caution when operating heat sealers to avoid burns.

Heat seals must be observed for bubbles and creases. Seals that are not smooth and complete will allow bacterial contamination after sterilization.

Some paper plastic and polyolefin-plastic packages contain self-adhesive seals that do not require heat. An adhesive portion is covered with a removable strip at one end of the self-adhesive sterilization pouch. When it is removed, that portion of the seal should be carefully folded over the opening of the package. shows an SP technician sealing a self-adhesive sterilization pouch. Care must be taken to avoid gaps, wrinkles or creases, which compromise the seal integrity for both heat-seal and self-seal closure systems.

Sealing tape to one end of the pouch is sometimes used to secure pouch openings. Care is needed to ensure that the seal is secure, without compromising gaps. Proper taping technique includes the folding of corners, so the side edges of the top corners are parallel to the bottom edge of the pouch.

Ensure that the plastic is folded onto the plastic and not paper topaper, so sterilant access is not impeded. Then, fold the open bottom edge over the folded corners. Seal with tape overlapping the edge of the pouch by about 1 quarter inch. Observe carefully to ensure that there are no gaps, creases or wrinkles, and that the tape has completely covered the pouch's open edge and is securely attached to the plastic. Note: This method of sealing pouches makes the package difficult to open and presents the contents aseptically.

Do Not Use

**Several closure methods are never appropriate for use:**

-   Do not use safety pins, staples or other sharp objects to seal packages. Punctures create holes that allow contamination. Even the smallest hole is large enough to allow bacteria to pass.
-   Do not use paper clips or binding clips. They can be removed and replaced without evidence of barrier compromise.
-   Do not use tapes that are not designed specifically to withstand the rigors of sterilization.

SP technicians must use closure methods specifically designed for the packaging material selected. They must also check the seals on all packages before dispensing them to user units. Any seals that appear to have been broken or opened should not be issued or used.

PACKAGE LABELING. It is essential that all packages be labeled prior to sterilization. The label must be complete and accurate to ensure that the correct packs are selected and opened.

**Label information should include the following:**

-   Description of package contents
-   Identification of the person that performed the packaging, the initials of package assembler
-   Lot control number
-   Identification of sterilizer and cycle to be used
-   Date of sterilization, unless contained in the lot control number
-   Assigned storage location

The requesting department or surgeon's name may also be included on the label for special-request items.

Standardized abbreviations and terms help avoid confusion when labeling packaging. Slang terms and nicknames should not be used. Labeling is necessary for the end user and also for sterilization processing, quality assurance, stock rotation, and inventory control purposes. Correct labeling is also critical in the event of a sterilization load recall.

SP technicians with the responsibility for labeling packages must use clear, legible handwriting and accurate descriptions. Confusion caused by an illegible or inaccurate package label can compromise patient safety because items may be misplaced, or the label may be misread and incorrectly dispensed. Either situation can cause a delay in patient care and treatment.

Labeling should be documented on label-sensitive tape; the indicator tape used to seal the package; commercially available, pre-printed adhesive labels; in-house computer-generated labels or the plastic side of a peel pouch.

For pouches, the labels or written information should not be placed on the paper or spunbonded polyolefin side, as they may inhibit the microbial barrier properties.

Approved felt-tip pens are generally used for marking packaging material. They should be indelible, non-bleeding, non-fading, non-toxic and able to withstand the sterilization method used.

SPECIAL PACKAGING CONCERNS

**Several basic packaging concerns require special mention:**

All packaging materials should be held at a temperature and humidity for a time recommended by the manufacturer. This will permit adequate sterilant penetration and help prevent super heating of the product during sterilization.

Packaging procedures should be performed only by the department responsible for sterilization. Other departments whose personnel might prepare and package their own instruments and supplies before sending them to SP for sterilization should be discouraged from this practice.

Often, SP technicians do not know about all items in the package, and the package could be processed inappropriately. Also, supplying packaging materials to each of these departments is not cost effective. If a facility does allow instrument preparation outside the SPD, personnel must receive training on the proper methods of processing those devices.

Packages should not be excessively taped because doing so makes opening the package more difficult and may inhibit the sterilization process.

Paper plastic pouches should be positioned in the sterilizer standing on edge in loading racks or placed in baskets specifically designed for these packages. They can also be held on edge by an alternate means like a peel pouch rack or tray pins, and they must be properly spaced.

Pouches should be loosely spaced in the basket to ensure the sterilant can reach the breathable paper side of each pouch because the plastic side is not penetrated by air, steam or other sterilants. Arrange the pouches in a paper-to­ plastic fashion in a perforated or mesh-bottom tray.

Paper plastic pouches should not be placed inside wrapped trays or containers. The plastic portion of the pouch is impervious to sterilants and can prevent a sterilant from contacting and sterilizing instrumentation. Plastic can also hinder circulation and disrupt air removal within the package or tray.

Pouch packages should not be hung in storage. Placing a hole in the package even outside of the sterilization area can rupture the package.

All packaging systems must be handled with care. Although they provide protection and a barrier for medical devices, packaging is not impenetrable and can be compromised by rough handling and contact with sharp surfaces. Several devices are on the market to help protect larger trays from damage such as tears in wrap. Facilities may choose to use those devices if they are experiencing issues with wrap integrity.

Observe pouch contents and outside packaging of flat wrap or containerized instruments for moisture after sterilization and reinspect prior to storage. Remember: Steam condenses on a metal surface when heat is transferred to the metal.

This condensation can allow contamination of the contents. Prevention of condensation is only possible when sterilizers with heated dry cycle capabilities are used; however, limiting sterilizer contents and following good loading practices can usually prevent the problem.

All sterilized packages, whether sterilized by the facility or purchased as sterile ready-to-use products, should be inspected to ensure the packaging material and or the seals have not been compromised before placing into sterile storage, prior to dispensing and before opening the package.

Sterility Maintenance, Sterilized packages must maintain their content sterility until opened.

Traditionally, the sterility of a package has been thought of as time-related, where the package is considered sterile until a specific expiration date is reached. Then, the package is taken out of inventory and reprocessed.

The Joint Commission T J C and the Association of periOperative Registered Nurses A O RN now recognize sterility as Event-Related.

-   **Time-related Sterility: is when a** package is considered sterile until a specific expiration date is reached.
-   **Event-related Sterility: is where i**tems are considered sterile unless the integrity of the packaging is compromised, damaged or suspected of being compromised, regardless of the sterilization date. This is sometimes abbreviated as E R S.

The concept of event-related sterility acknowledges that microbial contamination of a sterile package is caused by an event, such as improper handling or transport, rather than by time alone.

For example, one may purchase a carton of milk at the grocery store with an expiration date that is several days away; however, if he or she forgets to put the carton of milk in the refrigerator, it will become warm and sour. Even though the milk had an expected shelf life, an "event" happened that caused a shorter shelf life.

Event-related sterility or ERS depends on the quality of the wrapper material, handling procedures, storage and transport conditions, and the number of times the package is handled before use.

By closely controlling the environment and events to which a sterile package is exposed-rather than just the time the package is in storage-the probability of package contamination can be minimized.

Packaging material may be dated with a use by date meaning it must be sterilized prior to that dale, which differs from a sterilization expiration date.

If the dates are unclear, the manufacturer should be contacted for clarification. In addition, the manufacturer may provide a shelf-life validation study that specifies the length of time the package has been validated to maintain the integrity of the sterilized package after sterilization.

Protective Packaging

**Protective packaging, such as** plastic overwraps or dust covers or sterility maintenance covers, can be applied to packages after sterilization to protect the packages from dust, moisture and other contaminants. The plastic material should be at least 2 to 3 millimeters thick. Sterilized items must be thoroughly cooled before being placed into the protective package. The seal of the packaging should be secured with either a heat seal or security-tape sealing process. The overwrap should be clearly marked as protective packaging to prevent its use as part of the sterile field.

**Note**: Protective packaging overwrap is not to be placed in the sterilizer; it should be placed over properly cooled, sterilized items only. Always follow the protective covers specific IFU for proper application.

**Protective packaging:** A configuration of materials designed to prevent damage to the sterile barrier system and its contents from the time of their assembly until the point of use.

In CONCLUSION

Medical devices and supplies used in patient treatment and care are made of various materials and configurations. No single assembly method or packaging system meets all requirements for packaging and sterilization of all devices. SP technicians must understand assembly and packaging concepts and follow best work practices for preparing packages to help ensure that devices dispensed for patients are functional and safe for use.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Preparation and packaging**
-   **Super-heated steam**
-   **Chemical indicators Cls**
-   **Process challenge device PCD**
-   **Tamper-evident seals**
-   **Rigid container system**
-   **Wet pack**
-   **Time-related Sterility**
-   **Event-related Sterility**
-   **Protective package**

    **This concludes chapter 12. Thank you!!!**
