**Chapter 13.**

**Point-of-Use Disinfection and Sterilization.**

Learning Objectives.

**As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to** Define immediate use steam sterilization

1.  Explain the basic procedures to safely perform immediate use steam sterilization
2.  Address point-of-use processing for heat-sensitive medical devices

INTRODUCTION

The majority of instrument processing takes place in the Sterile Processing department (SPD); however, there are times when processing is performed at the point of use. These are two basic types of point-of-use processing. The first is immediate use steam sterilization (IUSS), which consists of cleaning, steam sterilization and immediate delivery of heat-resistant items to the procedure room.

This process is designed for instances when there is not enough time to send the items to the SPD for processing. The second type of point-of-use processing is designed for heat-sensitive items. Regardless of the process used, the goal is to provide an item that is safe for patient use. This chapter examines methods of point-of-use processing.

-   **Point of use processing:** Occurs when a medical device is processed immediately before use.
-   **Immediate use steam sterilization or I U S S: is a** Process designed for the cleaning, steam sterilization and immediate delivery of heat-resistant items for use in the procedure room.

IMMEDIATE USE STEAM STERILIZATION

In patient care, there are always unexpected events that require quick action. Instrument demands become urgent when there is an immediate patient need and the instruments are not ready for use. In previous years, flash sterilization was designed for use in the Operating Room for emergencies and immediate use. The term flash sterilization has since been replaced by I U S S.

Items processed using IUSS are cleaned according to their manufacturers' instructions for use or IFU, placed into containers specifically designated for IUSS, and sterilized according to manufacturer instructions.

Processing devices for immediate use can be safe and effective but only if all steps recommended by the device manufacturer are followed. This includes proper cleaning, decontamination, sterilization using the correct cycle, and aseptic transfer to the point of use. Shortcuts, such as improper cleaning in an effort to save time, can jeopardize patient safety. Following validated manufacturers' IFU and controlling process quality helps protect patients from infections and prolongs the life of instrumentation.

-   **Standards and Recommended Practices:** Several associations have developed standards and guidelines to help ensure IUSS procedures are performed properly.

Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation

Standards from the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) are not law; however, they are the recognized industry standards for sterilization and may be relevant in any legal proceeding. AAMI standards represent a national consensus, and many have been approved by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).

**ANSI AAM I ST79:** Comprehensive guide to steam sterilization and sterility assurance in healthcare facilities is a broad document covering recommended practices for steam sterilization. The document states that IUSS can be performed when deemed appropriate but should not be used for purposes of convenience or as a substitute for insufficient instrumentation.

**Items processed by IUSS should:**

-   Only be used in urgent clinical situations
-   Be decontaminated according to the manufacturer's IFU, with approved detergents and water to remove soil, blood, body fats and other substances
-   Be placed in an approved IUSS rigid sterilization container system
-   Be used immediately and not stored for later use
-   Be identified as IUSS devices

The Association of periOperative Registered Nurses

The Association of Peri Operative Registered Nurses or A O RN publishes its Guidelines for PeriOperative Practices, and surveying agencies refer to AORN guidelines.

**AORN guidelines state that IUSS can be performed only when the following conditions are met:**

-   The device manufacturer's IFU includes instructions for IUSS
-   Items are placed in a containment device that has been validated for IUSS
-   The IUSS container manufacturer's written IFU are followed
-   Items processed by IUSS are used immediately
-   Staff members are educated on the IUSS process
-   Recordkeeping is maintained to allow tracking of the device after use

Surveying Agencies

IUSS is designed for urgent situations when there is insufficient time to send an item through the normal terminal sterilization process. Surveying agencies closely monitor IUSS to ensure everything is being done by the healthcare facility to decrease IUSS and ensure that wherever and whenever IUSS is practiced, the processes are performed correctly.

-   **Terminal sterilization: is t**he process by which surgical instruments and medical devices are sterilized in their final containers, allowing them to be stored until needed.

The Joint Commission

The Joint Commission or TJC requires that complete documentation be made available for each IUSS cycle so that the device is traceable to the patient if a problem arises. In the past, TJC focused on how many IUSS cycles were run and how to reduce the amount of IUSS sterilization.

Now, in addition to focusing on IUSS reduction, TJC surveyors are focusing on the IUSS process to ensure all processes are completed properly. They expect the same safeguards and quality controls to be in place, regardless of whom operates a sterilizer or where the sterilizer is located.

**Some areas of focus include:**

-   **Cleaning and decontamination:** Before an item can be sterilized, it must be properly cleaned and decontaminated according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
-   **Sterilization:** The manufacturer's instructions must specify the type of IUSS cycle used, such as gravity displacement or dynamic air removal and length of time needed for sterilization. Some instruments may require an extended cycle or a specified dry time; some instruments can never undergo IUSS. The manufacturer's IFU must specify that the item can undergo IUSS cycles.
-   **Transfer to the sterile field:** Aseptic transfer from the sterilizer to the sterile field is required to prevent recontamination of the sterilized item.
-   **Frequency of IUSS use:** Lack of instrumentation is not an excuse for using IUSS. A plan should be in place to reduce I USS cycles.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services

**The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services or CMS has established the following requirements for IUSS:**

-   The same multi-step process used to prepare instruments for terminal sterilization must be completed for IUSS.
-   Parameters for all phases of the sterilization cycle must be determined by consulting the IFU for the instruments, sterilizer and containment device.
-   Each IUSS cycle must use physical monitors and chemical indicators or CIs. At least weekly, the sterilizer must be tested with a biological test for each type of IUSS cycle.
-   If IUSS must be used for an implant, a tracking system should be in place to trace the IUSS load to the patient.
-   Medical instruments and devices processed using IUSS must be contained in a packaging system labeled for the IUSS cycles used.
-   Items sterilized by IUSS must be used immediately.

**CMS also indicates that IUSS is NOT acceptable in the following circumstances:**

-   For implant processing, unless there is a documented emergency situation
-   For post-procedure decontamination of instruments used on patients with possible Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease or CJD or other prion diseases
-   When devices or loads have not been validated for the specific cycle used
-   For processing single-use devices

PROCEDURES FOR IUSS

Safe and effective IUSS requires that all steps in the process be performed properly each time to achieve sterilization and maintain sterility of instruments, all the way to the point of use. Improperly sterilized or contaminated instruments used in a surgical procedure can result in serious complications, from surgical site infections or SSI’s to increased costs and legal liability.

**Precleaning**

Precleaning of instrumentation is a necessary step to help promote effective, thorough decontamination and sterilization. AORN guidelines state that items should be kept free of gross soil during surgery. These guidelines are critical factors when items are to be prepared for IUSS. Soil is easier to remove when items are properly pretreated in the OR.

**Decontamination**

Thorough decontamination of medical devices is required for safe and effective IUSS. Manufacturers of sterilizers and medical devices assume that the level of contamination has been adequately reduced on the surfaces of instruments before they are placed in the sterilizer. If items are not properly cleaned, they cannot be sterilized.

Standard precautions require that employees who handle contaminated devices wear the appropriate personal protective equipment or PPE. This includes gloves, hair covering, eye protection, masks, fluid-impervious gown or jumpsuit, and shoe covers. PPE should be removed and discarded and not worn outside of the cleaning/decontamination area.

Manufacturer instructions for instrument processing should be available and consulted to ensure proper cleaning and decontamination before IUSS occurs. These may contain special cleaning instructions such as the disassembly process and the recommended use of cleaning solutions and mechanical cleaners. Instruments must be cleaned as thoroughly as they would in the SP decontamination area.

Items must be decontaminated in an area designed to clean instruments and never in a scrub or handwashing sink. Surveying agencies will check to ensure that staff members are trained on proper cleaning methods.

Prior to placing instruments in an IUSS-approved sterilization container, instruments must be carefully inspected to ensure they are clean and functional. Instruments must be placed in the sterilization container in a manner that facilitates full steam contact. Sterilization containers should be placed in the sterilizer chamber following the container and the sterilizer's IFU.

**IUSS Cycles**

Steam sterilizers used for IUSS are usually placed in close proximity to user areas. There are two types of steam cycles commonly used: gravity displacement and dynamic air removal, which includes the pre-vacuum and steam flush pressure pulse (SFPP) cycles. The type of cycle to be used depends on the manufacturer's IFU.

Consult the manufacturer's IFU for exposure times and cycles when using containment devices or packaging systems.

**Safe Transport After IUSS**

Instruments subjected to IUSS should be transported to the point of use in a manner that reduces the potential for contamination. Failure to take appropriate measures to protect IUSS-processed instruments after their removal from the sterilizer and during transport lo the point of use will increase the potential for contamination and the patient's risk for acquiring an SSI

**Staff Education**

Educating staff members who perform IUSS is important to decrease the possibility of errors that could occur during the process. Staff members should receive initial training, and competency assessments should be performed, followed by continuing education at regular intervals to review and update their knowledge.

QUALITY CONTROL MONITORS FOR IUSS

The efficacy of every sterilization cycle must be monitored. The quality assurance of each process includes physical, chemical and biological monitors. All of these monitors should be carefully watched and reviewed to identify potential issues.

As the name implies, a dynamic air removal test is only performed in dynamic air removal sterilizers. This test should be run each day the sterilizer is used. Biological indicators BIs should be run at least weekly and with every implant cycle. A CI should be included in the container with every cycle. All quality monitors should be inspected prior to releasing the contents for use.

**Recordkeeping**

IUSS records allow for traceability of every sterilized item to the patient. It is important to keep accurate and complete records that include evidence of cycle performance such as sterilization cycle printouts and Bl and Cl results.

**Sterilizer cycle records should include:**

-   **Patient identification:** There must be a way to identify the patient on whom the items were used in the event of a problem such as sterilization cycle failure or the patient acquiring a healthcare-associated infection or HAI.
-   Sterilizer and sterilizer cycle identification
-   Instruments sterilized in the cycle
-   Cycle parameters
-   Reason the IUSS cycle was run, for example, instrument dropped on floor
-   Operator's signature or other identification

No national standard exists for how long sterilization records should be maintained. Local statute requirements and individual facility policies should be followed.

POINT-OF-USE PROCESSING FOR HEAT-SENSITIVE DEVICES

**Low-Temperature Disinfection and Sterilization Processes**

Advancing sterilization technologies have changed the way procedures are performed. The medical devices used in many procedures have changed as well. Many of the medical devices used today are heat sensitive. In other words, processing them in a heated process, such as with steam, will lead to damage. Facilities must use low-temperature methods to safely process those heat-sensitive items.

There are several types of low-temperature disinfection or sterilization options for point-of-use processing. Selection is determined by the types of items that will be processed and their compatibility with that low-temperature process. The decision to process heat-sensitive items al the point of use is made based on the medical device I FU and the logistics of the facility.

The level of biocidal process required is based on the intended use of the item. Sterilization is the preferred biocidal method for semi-critical and critical items. If sterilization is not an option for semi-critical items, the items may undergo high-level disinfection or HLD. The most common items are transesophageal echocardiography exam or T E E probes**,** vaginal probes and flexible endoscopes. Methods used include HLD, liquid chemical sterilization, or a hydrogen peroxide mist unit.

All low-temperature processes utilize a chemical process. SP technicians must understand the specific type of process used in their facility and be educated on proper handling and operational procedures, as well as safety protocols for the specific process.

Preparation of Devices for Low-Temperature Processes

As with IUSS processes, proper preparation is critical to the success of the low-temperature point-of-use process. Items must be cleaned thoroughly because any soil remaining on the device will result in a failed process and pose a danger to the patient. Items must be prepared for the low-temperature process according to the manufacturer's IFU.

The device should be protected from environmental contaminants once removed from the processor. After processing, the device should be clearly labeled as "patient ready." As with all HLD and sterilization processes, the medical device manufacturer must have approved the device for the specific biocidal process to be performed.

Quality Control Monitors for Point-of-Use Low-Temperature Processes

-   Quality control monitors will vary depending on the process used; however, there are some commonalities:
-   The process must be monitored
-   Items processed must be documented

Monitoring will be unique to each low-temperature process. For manual HLD using a soak process, the solution must be checked for minimum effective concentration or M E C. For mechanical processes, testing should be performed according to the equipment and chemical manufacturer's IFU. That testing may include chemical, biological or diagnostic tests.

All items processed at the point of use must be documented, and those records, along with documentation of quality testing, should be kept on file.

In CONCLUSION

Point-of-use processing meets a specific need in procedural areas. Although it is performed away from the SPD, manufacturers' instructions remain the same. When performed properly, point of use processing can provide items that are safe for patient use.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Point-of-use processing**
-   **Immediate use steam sterilization (IUSS)**
-   **Terminal sterilization**

**This concludes chapter 13. Thank you**
