Chapter 15.

**Low-Temperature Sterilization.**

Learning Objectives

**As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to** Discuss basic requirements for low-temperature sterilization systems

1.  Explain different types of low-temperature sterilization
2.  Review parameters of low-temperature sterilization methods

INTRODUCTION

Low-temperature sterilization is important due to the development and growing use of heat- and moisture-sensitive medical devices. Ethylene oxide or EO gas and hydrogen peroxide are the low-temperature sterilization methods commonly used in healthcare settings. Chemicals used to sterilize instruments have toxic properties, although levels of toxicity and potential for exposure vary widely, based on the sterilization method and sterilant used. As a result, Sterile Processing SP technicians must be trained on how to use them safely and effectively. Each low-temperature sterilization method has advantages and limitations, and each type of low-temperature sterilizer has specific process requirements that must be met.

This chapter reviews common low-temperature systems and the basic requirements for their use.

BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR LOW­ TEMPERATURE STERILIZATION

Eight basic requirements are important for any type of low­ temperature sterilization system:

-   **Efficacy or effectiveness:** Is the capability of providing the minimum-required sterility assurance level or S A L.
-   **Sterility assurance level S A L:** is The probability of a viable microorganism being present on a device after sterilization.
-   **Safety:** There should be no toxic residuals remaining on the packaging or device upon completion of the sterilization cycle.
-   **Exposure monitoring:** Ability to monitor the sterilization process to ensure concentrations of sterilants in the work area remain within any required exposure limits.
-   **Sterilization performance monitoring:** Must be capable of being reliably monitored using physical, chemical indicators (Cls) and biological indicators (Bis).
-   **Penetration:** Must be able to penetrate through packaging materials and into lumens and other the devices other hard­ to-reach areas.
-   **Material compatibility:** There should be no changes in the device's functionality.
-   **Adaptability:** Should be compatible with existing healthcare practices.
-   **Approval:** Must be cleared by or registered with the appropriate regulatory agencies.
-   To be effective in the healthcare environment, a sterilization system must satisfy all requirements; failure to meet even one requirement may pose a significant risk to patients and healthcare workers.

**Efficacy**

To be legally marketed in the U.S., the U.S. Food and Drug Administration F D A requires each sterilant and sterilization technology to be rigorously tested against a broad range of microorganisms. The low-temperature sterilization technologies addressed in this chapter use different sterilization agents and have different processing methods. When used according to the sterilizer's instructions for use I F U, each sterilization method meets the required minimum SAL, as outlined by the regulations, standards and guidelines.

**Safety**

Chemicals used as sterilants are designed to destroy a wide range of pathogens; however, the same properties that make them effective sterilants also make them harmful to humans. In sterilization methods, such as EO, significant toxic residues can build up in medical devices and packaging. To ensure a safe work environment, low-temperature sterilization systems should be used according to the manufacturers' instructions, and appropriate work practices, engineering controls, personal protective equipment (PPE), and monitoring should be followed.

**Exposure Monitoring**

EO has been widely used as a low-temperature sterilant since the 1950s. It has potential health risks that require monitoring, in addition to long aeration times and other precautions. While safer for healthcare workers, newer low-temperature sterilization technologies also can pose health risks. To ensure the safety of healthcare workers, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has established permissible exposure limits (PELs) for all low-temperature sterilants. These exposure limits are expressed as an eight-hour, time-weighted average (TWA): the total allowable worker exposure during an eight­ hour period.

-   **Permissible exposure limit PEL:** is The maximum amount or concentration of a chemical that a worker may be exposed to under OSHA regulations.
-   **Time-weighted average TWA:** Is The amount of a substance employees can be exposed to over an eight-hour day.

The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health NIOSH also has developed standards for immediately dangerous to life or health H L D concentrations for low­ temperature sterilants.

**Sterilizer Performance Monitoring**

Monitoring sterilizer performance is essential to ensure the successful sterilization of medical instruments and devices. No single monitoring method provides all of the information necessary to ensure effective sterilization; Recommended practices stale that available information from physical, chemical and biological monitors should be used to assess the effectiveness of a process before releasing a load. It is essential that SP technicians understand how to handle and use Cls and BIs and also know how to read and interpret their results.

**Penetration**

Many devices are significantly more complex than their counterparts of just a few years ago. Not only must the sterilant penetrate packaging material, it must also reach narrow lumens.

The properties of a chemical sterilant impact its ability to penetrate effectively. For example, EO inactivates microbes by a process called alkylation. This allows EO to penetrate packaging and materials to reach remote surfaces where microbes may be located. Hydrogen peroxide destroys microbes through oxidation.

Alkylation A chemical reaction where hydrogen is replaced with an alkyl group; this renders the cell unable to normally metabolize or reproduce, or both.

Oxidation Involves the act or process of oxidizing, which is the addition of oxygen to a compound with a loss of electrons.

**Materials Compatibility**

Medical devices are composed of a variety of materials that may be affected by sterilant ingredients. Sterilizers must be tested to establish compatibility with a wide range of materials. Medical device manufacturers test the compatibility of their devices with one or more of the available sterilization technologies. Compatibility information can be found in the IFU. The manufacturer's IFU should be carefully followed to help ensure successful sterilization and prevent damage that may increase costs and limit instrument availability.

**Adaptability**

The low-temperature sterilization process should be compatible with existing device processing practices.

**Approval**

The sterilization system must be cleared and registered with the appropriate regulatory agencies.

ETHYLENE OXIDE

**Background**

For more than 60 years, EO gas has been an effective sterilization technology for heat and moisture-sensitive medical devices.

**Efficacy**

EO has excellent microbicidal activity. During the alkylation process, EO destroys the cell's ability to metabolize or reproduce, which leads to the organism's death.

**Penetration**

EO is a small molecule that vaporizes easily and can permeate throughout a wide range of materials to reach recessed areas. Due to its high vapor pressure and low boiling point, EO is easily maintained in the gas phase.

**Sterilization Cycle and Process Parameters**

In healthcare EO systems, the gas is provided in individual dose cartridges that are placed inside the chamber. If a leak develops after the cartridge is punctured the ventilation system will pull room air into the chamber rather than allow EO to be released. The basic EO sterilization cycle consists of five stages: preconditioning and humidification, gas introduction, exposure, evacuation and air washes. The cycle takes approximately 2 and a half to 3 and a half hours, excluding aeration time.

Upon completion of the sterilization cycle, the items must go through an aeration process to remove all residual EO before the sterilizer can be unlocked and the items can be removed.

Operators should demonstrate competency in all parameters of EO sterilization.

-   **Aeration:** is A process in which sterilized packages are subjected to moving air to facilitate removal of toxic residuals after exposure to a sterilizing agent such as EO.
-   **Residual EO:** is the Amount of EO that remains inside materials after they are sterilized.

**Safety**

EO is a toxic gas classified by OSHA as a carcinogen and reproductive hazard. To protect SP technicians, EO sterilizers should be in a well-ventilated area, with a room air exchange rate of at least 10 changes per hour. The sterilizers are installed in negative-pressure rooms with contained ventilation systems venting to the outside. Ventilation systems, exhaust lines and floor drains should be periodically checked by qualified personnel to ensure they are working properly.

Today's EO sterilizers are designed for safety and have many engineering safeguards to prevent personnel from coming in contact with EO. In addition, environmental engineering controls protect SP technicians.

Cartridges with I00% EO should be stored in a ventilated flammable liquid storage cabinet that is exhausted outside, away from heat, sparks and sunlight.

**To minimize the safety risks associated with the use of EO, employees should be instructed about:**

-   EO hazards
-   Sterilizer manufacturer and EO supplier IFU
-   Processing procedures
-   Storage and handling of EO cartridges
-   Procedures to reduce employee exposure to EO
-   Use of PPE
-   Principles of EO monitoring and interpretation of results
-   Handling canceled cycles
-   Applicable OSHA regulations
-   Safety data sheets (SDS)
-   EO emergency plans
-   **Safety data sheet or SDS:** A written statement providing detailed information about a chemical or toxic substance, including potential hazards and appropriate handling methods. An SOS is provided by the product manufacturer to the buyer and must be available in a place that is easily accessible to those who will use the product.

**Exposure Monitoring**

Personal monitoring involves the use of devices affixed directly to the employee's clothing in the breathing zone within one foot of the person's nose. One limitation of personal monitoring devices is that sampling results are not available until after the actual sampling period has ended. OSHA requires that facilities using EO sterilization have a system or procedure to immediately alert affected employees in case of a leak, spill or equipment failure.

Area monitoring is used to measure the working area where EO sterilizers are used. Leak detection tests also should be performed. According to OSHA, the employer shall keep an accurate record of all measurements taken to monitor employee exposure to EO.

**This information includes:**

-   Date of measurement
-   Sampling and analytical methods used and evidence of their accuracy
-   Number, duration and results of samples taken
-   Type of protective devices worn, if any
-   Name of employees whose exposures are represented

The employer shall maintain this record for at least 30 years. OSHA also requires that medical surveillance records for each employee exposed to high levels of EO be kept for the duration of employment, plus 30 years. For specific monitoring requirements, refer to federal, state and local regulations.

**Materials Compatibility**

EO has excellent compatibility with many reusable medical devices. SP technicians must follow specific device manufacturer recommendations for the appropriate sterilization process.

**EO should not be used to sterilize:**

-   Liquids: EO will combine with liquids and may produce harmful chemical byproducts.
-   Devices with energy sources: Energy sources could create a spark in the sterilization chamber during the sterilization cycle.
-   Leather items: Chemicals used in the tanning process will combine with EO to form chlorohydrin, which can cause negative health effects.

**Packaging.**

EO sterilization is compatible with a variety of packaging materials, including paper/plastic or Tyvek peel pouches, approved fabric wrappers, medical crepe paper, polypropylene, and most container systems.

**Note:** Aluminum foil, cellophane, nylon films, polyester; Plastic films and Styrofoam, should not be used.

**Loading and Unloading EO Sterilizers.**

Proper loading is important since overloading impedes proper air removal, load humidification, sterilant penetration, and aeration. Items should be arranged to avoid contact with chamber walls. Pouches should be placed on edge in wire baskets. Stacking instrument sets should be avoided.

**Note:** The Environmental Protection Agency requires that EO sterilizers only be operated with full loads of items that share common aeration times. Emergency circumstances may require sterilization of less than full loads. If a less than full load is sterilized due to medical necessity, the operator must record this as well. These records must be kept for five years, and the most recent being kept on file for two years on site.

**Aeration.**

Because EO can be absorbed by many materials, aeration is required to remove EO residual gases before instruments and packaging can be safely handled.

When the exposure cycle ends, one or more vacuum pulses remove EO from the chamber. The aeration phase then takes place as warm air circulates through the chamber to remove residuals. For aeration recommendations, consult the devices manufacturer's IFU.

**Sterilizer Performance Monitors.**

An EO sterilizer should be monitored with physical monitors and Cls and Bis. While none of these provide conclusive evidence of device sterility on their own, they do provide a high degree of sterility assurance when used in combination.

-   **Physical monitors:** Physical monitors include operating pressure gauges, temperature control or measurement devices, timing recorders, and humidity sensors. Charts, graphs and printouts detailing the measurements made by physical monitors must be carefully examined to ensure the correct parameters were met before devices are removed from the sterilizer.
-   **Chemical monitoring:** External Cls should be used on the outside of every instrument package to demonstrate that each pack has been processed. Internal Cls should be used inside every package to measure whether the sterilant has penetrated the packaging.
-   **Biological monitoring:** Biological monitoring is required for each cycle run in an EO sterilizer. The microorganism of choice for EO is the *Bacillus Atropheus* spore. Follow the sterilizer manufacturer's IFU for proper Bl placement and incubation.

HYDROGEN PEROXIDE SYSTEMS

Several types of low-temperature systems use Hydrogen peroxide or H2O2, as the sterilant. While the systems operate similarly, there are some key differences.

Hydrogen Peroxide Gas Plasma

**Background**

The more recent low-temperature sterilization technologies include H2O2 gas plasma for the inactivation of microorganisms.

This method is popular due to its safety, relative to EO, and its cycle times that allow faster turnaround of medical devices. The byproducts of the cycle are water vapor and oxygen, and are nontoxic, eliminating the need for an aeration phase.

H2O2 is a highly effective sterilant that sterilizes by Oxidation of key cellular components. Plasma is a matter distinguishable from a solid, liquid or gas.

**Efficacy**

H2O2 gas plasma-using a hydrogen peroxide solution ranging from 59% to 95% for the sterilization cycle-has been proven effective for killing microorganisms.

**Penetration**

H2O2, gas plasma sterilizers use deep vacuums, multiple pulse additions of the sterilant, and increased concentrations. These systems can sterilize a wide range of devices.

Guidelines have been developed for lumen diameter and length to ensure adequate penetration and efficacy for various cycle parameters. Newer generations of H2O2 gas plasma sterilizers

utilize a higher concentration of hydrogen peroxide up to 95%, to shorten exposure time and lessen lumen restrictions. There are still some restrictions involving the size, length and number of lumens, and the type of material and number of devices per cycle. As always, users should closely follow the instrument and sterilizer manufacturers' instructions and recommendations.

**Types of H2O2 gas Plasma Systems:**

There are several types of H2O2, gas plasma sterilizers available, ranging from compact systems with 28 to 38-minute processing times to large-capacity systems with 75-minute cycle times. Different models have different cycle times, load capacities and capabilities for processing instruments.

**Sterilization Cycle and Process Parameters**

**The phases of H2O2 Gas Plasma include:**

-   **Vacuum:** The load is heated while the vacuum system removes air from the chamber and packages until the pressure is reduced to below atmospheric pressure.
-   **Injection:** Once the correct pressure has been reached, a pre-measured amount of concentrated H2O2is pumped into the chamber.
-   **Diffusion:** This phase drives hydrogen peroxide vapor into the small crevices and lumens of devices.
-   **Plasma:** A vacuum decreases the pressure, and radio frequency RF energy is radiated within the chamber from an electrode screen. The RF energy creates H2O2 gas plasma. The injection and plasma phases are repeated a second time.
-   **Vent:** At the end of the second plasma sequence, air is vented into the chamber through bacterial high-efficiency particulate air HEPA filters, returning the chamber to atmospheric pressure. The process byproducts are water vapor and oxygen. Aeration is not required, and instruments can be used immediately after cooling.

Operators should demonstrate competency in all parameters of hydrogen peroxide H2O2 gas plasma sterilization.

Safety.

Concentrated H2O2, liquid can irritate skin and is damaging to eyes if direct contact occurs. A number of safeguards built into H2O2 sterilizers are designed to minimize the likelihood of personnel contacting H2O2

The H2O2 is packaged in sealed container, with a chemical leak indicator on the outside of the package. These indicators change color when exposed to liquid or vapor H2O2

To minimize the likelihood of exposure to H2O2 when removing items from a canceled cycle, SP technicians should always wear the recommended PPE. As with any chemical used for sterilization, healthcare workers should consult the SDS and follow all manufacturer recommendations and departmental procedures.

**To minimize H2O2 risks, employees should be instructed about:**

Storage, handling and disposal of H2O2

**Exposure Monitoring**

Monitoring the area around the system during operation should be conducted according to the manufacturer's IFU and established guidelines.

**Materials Compatibility**

H2O2 gas plasma sterilization is compatible with a wide variety of materials found in medical devices

**H2O2 gas plasma is not compatible with:**

-   Liquids and powders
-   Any material that absorbs liquids
-   Items that contain cellulose, such as cotton, paper or cardboard, textiles or any item containing wood pulp

**Packaging**

Packaging materials can affect the penetration of H2O2. Packaging materials used in the sterilizers should be designed to optimize diffusion of the H2O2 and not interfere with the RF energy or absorb H202.

Approved trays and container systems, polypropylene wrap and Tyvek pouches are compatible with H202 sterilization.

Cellulose-containing packaging materials, such as paper/plastic pouches, cellulose-based disposable wrappers, and muslin wraps, should not be used with H2O2 gas plasma sterilizers because they absorb the peroxide and inhibit effective penetration.

Excess moisture remaining on devices can cause the cycle to abort. Consult the manufacturer's IFU for suggested drying methods.

**Loading H2O2 Gas Plasma Sterilizers**

As with other low-temperature sterilization technologies, H2O2 gas plasma sterilizers must be properly loaded for effective sterilization. If the available amount of H2O2 is reduced because it reacts or is absorbed before reaching all surfaces, a sterilization failure could occur; therefore, the chamber should not be overloaded.

**Sterilizer Performance Monitors**

H2O2gas plasma sterilizers should be monitored with physical indicators, Cls and BIs.

**Sterilizer performance monitors include:**

-   **Physical monitoring:** H2O2 gas plasma sterilizers operate on a fixed automatic cycle controlled by a microprocessor. All critical parameters are monitored during the operation of the cycle, and a printed record documenting the process parameters is provided at the end of each cycle. All physical monitors must be carefully examined to ensure the correct parameters were met before devices are removed from the sterilizer.
-   **Chemical monitoring:** External Cls should be used on the outside of every package to demonstrate exposure to H2O2 gas plasma. Internal Cls should also be used to demonst1 at exposure to H2O2. Internal CIs should be placed at challenging locations inside each pack.
-   **Biological monitoring:** The microorganism of choice for Hp gas plasma Bls is the *Geobacillus stearothermophilus* spore. Biological monitoring should be performed at least daily, but preferably with each load. Follow the sterilizer manufacturer's IFU for proper Bl use.

Vaporized Hydrogen Peroxide

**Background.**

Low-temperature sterilization technology utilizing vaporized hydrogen peroxide or VHP has been available to hospitals in the U.S. since 2007. As with H2O2 gas plasma, VHP systems utilize an oxidative process and provide a cycle time that improves the throughput of medical devices.

**Efficacy.**

VHP sterilization uses a 59% H2O2 solution that is shown to be effective against a broad spectrum of microorganisms.

**Penetration.**

VHP is injected four times during each sterilization cycle. Upon completion of the fourth injection hold period, the load is automatically aerated in the sterilizer. The VHP is exhausted from the chamber through a catalytic converter that converts the VHP to water and oxygen.

**Types of VHP Systems**

There are different types of VHP sterilizers. One system has a single, pre-programmed, 55-minute sterilization cycle for use with both lumened and non-lumened instruments and devices. Another system offers two pre-programmed cycles: a 28-minute cycle for non-lumened instruments and a 55-minute cycle used to sterilize instruments with lumens and non-stainless steel mated surfaces.

These sterilizers use different technologies, and the cycles have different sterilant injection numbers, sterilant exposure times, H202 concentration levels, and cycle pressure profiles. VHP sterilization processes are based on a fixed amount of sterilant for each cycle type and for every load placed in the chamber.

This fixed amount of sterilant is delivered in different manners such as an ampule contained in a cassette, or cup, depending upon the type of sterilizer used. It is important to note that by having a specific fixed amount of sterilant there is little room for error since no additional sterilant is added during the sterilant exposure phase; therefore, a small load (or a very large load) is exposed lo the same amount of sterilant during the sterilization exposure phase.

**Always follow the manufacturer's IFU for sterilizer operation.**

**Sterilization Cycle and Process Parameters**

The sterilization cycle of many types of VHP systems operate at low pressure and temperature and is suitable for processing heat- and moisture-sensitive medical devices. VH P is generated by injecting a fixed amount of aqueous H2O2 into a vaporization chamber where the solution is heated and converted to a vapor and then introduced into the sterilizer chamber under negative pressure.

**The phases of VHP systems include:**

-   **Conditioning:** To remove air and excess moisture from the chamber and packaging, the chamber is evacuated and then recharged with dry, filtered air.
-   **Leak test:** Vacuum is held to ensure a leak-tight chamber.
-   **Sterilization:** Enhances penetration by injecting VHP into the chamber with a series of pulses, each followed by a hold period.
-   **Aeration:** Upon completion of the last VHP injection hold period, the load is automatically aerated in the sterilizer. The chamber VHP is exhausted through a catalytic converter that changes the VHP to water and oxygen. No special venting is required.

As with all methods of sterilization, operators must demonstrate competency in all parameters of VHP sterilization.

**Safety.**

Concentrated H2O2 is corrosive to skin, eyes, nose, throat, lungs and the gastrointestinal tract. Under normal conditions of use, the VHP sterilizer operator is not exposed to the contents of the sterilant container.

The sterilizer automatically dispenses and injects liquid hydrogen peroxide or LHP into the chamber. After each sterilization pulse, VHP is removed from the chamber and converted to water and oxygen. An aeration phase facilitates the removal of H2O2 residuals from devices and packaging.

To avoid exposure to LHP when removing items from a canceled cycle, SP technicians should always wear the appropriate PPE.

**To minimize risks, employees should be instructed about:**

-   Applicable SOS
-   Handling canceled loads
-   Applicable OSHA regulations
-   PPE use
-   Storage, handling and disposal of H2O2 cartridges

**Exposure Monitoring**

No personal or area monitors are required. Testing to check for H2O2 vapors in the environment around the sterilizer has show acceptable VHP levels during typical sterilization cycle conditions.

**Materials Compatibility**

VHP sterilization is compatible with a wide range of medical devices being processed. The VHP system is not intended to process liquids, linens, powders or any cellulose materials.

**Packaging**

Packaging materials can affect the penetrating capability of VHP. Packaging materials approved for use with VHP sterilization include polypropylene. Tyvek and some sterilization containers are also validated for H2O2 sterilization.

**Loading VHP Sterilizers**

VHP sterilizers must be loaded properly for effective sterilization. Sterilizers are cleared by the FDA, with a maximum weight limit for individual loads for each cycle type. Always refer to the sterilizer's IFU for specific restrictions on devices for each cycle type.

**During the loading process of a low-temperature H202 sterilizer, the following details should be taken into consideration:**

-   Ensure the devices are approved for a specific VHP sterilizer model and cycle type.
-   Ensure the total load weight is below the stated weight limit.
-   Select the packaging type acceptable for use in the VHP sterilizer.
-   Always follow the sterilizer IFU for lumen size, length and quantity.

**Sterilizer Performance Monitors**

-   VHP sterilizers should be monitored with physical monitors, Cls and BIs.

**Sterilizer performance monitors include:**

Monitoring all critical parameters during the operation of the cycle and the printing of a record at the end of each cycle to document the process parameters. Ali physical monitors must be carefully examined to ensure the correct parameters were met before devices are removed from the sterilizer.

-   **Cls:** External CIs should be used on the outside of every package to demonstrate exposure to **H202**.
-   Internal Cls should also be used to demonstrate exposure to H2O2.
-   Internal Cls should be placed at challenging locations in each pack.

**BIs:** The microorganism of choice for VHP is the *Geobacillus stearothermophilus* spore. Biological monitoring is required each day the sterilizer is used but recommended for every cycle*.* Follow sterilizer manufacturer’s IFU for proper BI placement.

REVIEW OF LOW-TEMPERATURE STERILIZATION PROCESSES

CONCLUSION

Today's instrumentation is far more sophisticated and complex than devices of even the more recent past, and many of the materials cannot withstand the high temperatures or moisture required for steam sterilization. For these types of medical devices, low-temperature sterilization can be used. Low­ temperature sterilization uses chemicals in the process, and a significant amount of detail goes into sterilizing each load. The SP technician must be knowledgeable of all factors involved in this process. When procedures are carefully followed, these methods are safe for patients, medical devices, and personnel.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Sterility assurance level - SAL**
-   **Permissible exposure level - PEL**
-   **Time-weighted average - TWA**
-   **Alkylation**
-   **Oxidation**
-   **Aeration**
-   **Residual ethylene oxide - EO**
-   **Safety data sheet – SDS**

    **This concludes chapter 15. Thank you**
