Chapter 17.

Monitoring and Recordkeeping for Sterile Processing.

Learning Objectives

**As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to** Discuss the importance of monitoring work areas and processes within the Sterile Processing department

1.  Discuss the importance of recordkeeping
2.  Explain the types of monitoring required in each area of the Sterile Processing department
3.  Explain the need for monitoring and review of the sterilization process indicators that help assure quality control
4.  Discuss the importance of employee training and continuing education records

INTRODUCTION

Much planning and effort goes into every aspect of the Sterile Processing department (SPD). From the decontamination area to the storage area, rigid requirements must be met to help ensure the safety of patients and healthcare workers.

Documentation is required to provide a record that those requirements were met; if requirements were not adequately met, documentation provides a record to assist with performance improvement.

Sterile Processing – SP technicians are involved in the recordkeeping process across many different functions of their jobs. Records provide evidence that processes were routinely checked, and the information collected provides a quality framework that will be examined by surveying agencies, such as The Joint Commission - TJC, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services – C M S, and state agencies, such the local Department of Health. If the healthcare facility is involved in a legal claim regarding any products that were dispensed from or processed through the SPD, records can help demonstrate that a specific standard of practice was followed.

This chapter provides information about SP recordkeeping requirements and addresses methods used to **monitor** and document conditions and processes to meet established requirements. Special emphasis is placed on the methods used to monitor sterilization processes and the recordkeeping required for those processes.

-   **Monitor: Means** To watch, observe, listen or check something for a specific purpose over a period of time.

THE IMPORTANCE OF ACCURATE RECORDS

Records are kept to document many processes and conditions in the SPD, including sterilization cycles, preventative maintenance, and routine equipment testing and cleaning. It is important to note, however, that records are only as good as the information they contain. Having incomplete records is as detrimental as having no records at all.

**The following are some facts about SPD records:**

-   **Recordkeeping is mandatory:** SPD recordkeeping is not optional. It is as much a part of the job as assembling instruments or operating sterilizers.
-   **Records must be accurate:** Information must be documented as it is, even if the information indicates a process has failed to meet the expected standard.
-   **Records must be legible and understandable:** Handwritten records should be legible to anyone who needs to review them. Slang, unapproved abbreviations and nicknames should not be used, as that terminology may confuse the reader.
-   **Records must be complete:** All information should be documented according to the department's specific requirements.
-   **Records should be audited routinely:** Routine audits ensure that documents contain all necessary information.

Accurate and complete records provide documentation that the SPD is following standards, regulations and its own procedures to help ensure ongoing adherence to best practices.

GENERAL MONITORING

SP technicians should continually monitor their environment to help ensure that the integrity of each work area and the processes performed in those areas are maintained. Some monitoring is informal such as watching to ensure that everyone who enters the area is dressed appropriately, practices good hand hygiene and follows established traffic control guidelines. This type of informal monitoring is not recorded, but each employee is expected to identify and correct breaches in established protocols. Visual monitoring is especially important when monitoring dress codes in the decontamination area.

Visitors, such as loaned instrument vendor personnel or facility employees from other departments like Facilities Maintenance, Biomedical Engineering, Environmental Services - EVS and others, may not be familiar with or understand the importance of personal protective equipment – PPE, and may endanger themselves or others if they enter the area without proper attire.

Formal monitoring of the physical environment is also required. For example, room temperature and humidity must be monitored at least daily to ensure they meet the established standard.

**Note:** Standards for temperature and humidity can be found in the ANSI/ASHRAEIASHE Standard 170, Ventilation of Health Care Facilities. Temperatures and humidity for sterile processing are determined by the initial insta/latio11 of the heating, ventilation and air conditioning system (HVAC) or last system upgrade.

That data must be recorded, along with actions taken when temperature and humidity deviate from established parameters. Some departments use electronic devices to collect the data and transfer the data to an electronic record, while others collect the data manually. In either case, SP technicians must have that data recorded and accessible.

**Note:** Temperature and humidity in some facilities are monitored, documented and maintained by Facilities Maintenance.

SP technicians also monitor their work areas for safety hazards. They learn to keep a watchful eye for unsafe conditions, broken or unsafe equipment, and other issues that may put themselves and others at risk. Once identified, they remedy the situation, if possible (e.g., wiping up a spill), or report it to the appropriate person to initiate a repair or replacement process.

**Departmental cleanliness is also monitored by SP technicians.**

Routine cleaning usually is performed by the E V S department. Cleaning should be scheduled, documented and available in either the SPD or by request from the EVS department. There are several areas in the SPD that staff are required to maintain, SP technicians are responsible for keeping their work area clean. This not only means cleaning their work areas at designated times like at the end of their shift, but also involves cleaning the area whenever it becomes contaminated or soiled.

SP technicians are often assigned specific cleaning duties within the SPD. For example, they are often responsible for cleaning cabinets, racks and carts in the sterile storage area. SP staff are assigned to clean those areas because of their understanding of sterile package handling and their ability to handle sterile items, clean storage shelves, and return those items to their proper location without compromising the integrity of the sterile packs.

The cleaning process in this very important area must be documented to provide a record of routine cleaning. This may be done by using a cleaning checklist to demonstrate compliance with the cleaning schedule. Monitoring and documenting cleaning outcomes provides feedback to improve the thoroughness of the cleaning process.

SP technicians are also responsible for cleaning transport equipment in their area. Every effort must be made to limit the presence of dust, lint and microbial contamination in the work area. Microbial contamination must be kept to a minimum in all work areas. Excess dust can easily be transported to items being prepared for sterilization or onto sterile packages. In either case, that dust may then become airborne and be introduced into an open wound during a procedure.

SP staff also monitor equipment within their work areas. Some monitoring is informal, such as checking the sterilizer carts for dust; other monitoring is formal; for example, small electrical equipment has a current preventive maintenance or PM sticker. Items falling outside of their PM date should be rechecked by qualified personnel, such as biomedical engineers, according to facility policy.

In addition to general guidelines for all work areas, there are unique requirements for each area. The following sections review those requirements.

DECONTAMINATION AREA MONITORING

Monitoring of the decontamination area is important to ensure all cleaning equipment is working properly. If the equipment is not working properly, instruments will not be clean and safe to handle.

**Automatic Dose Units.**

If an automated chemical delivery system or dose unit is used, it should be routinely verified or calibrated to verify it is dosing the correct amount.

**Water Quality.**

Poor water quality will impact every process in the decontamination area. Cleaning chemicals must be used with the recommended waler pH and will not function as designed if the water's pH is incompatible with the chemical. Hard water will cause scale to form on equipment, reducing the equipment's cleaning effectiveness. Water quality should be monitored to ensure that the appropriate chemical dilution is utilized. Commercially prepared water testing products may be purchased to test water on a weekly or daily basis.

**Mechanical Cleaning Equipment.**

Specific tests are available for each type of equipment. SP technicians must follow the equipment manufacturer's instructions for use (IFU) for inspection and testing. If the machine does not meet the inspection requirements outlined by the manufacturer, or if the test fails, the SP manager should be notified immediately. All test results should be documented.

**Ultrasonic Cleaners.**

Ultrasonic cleaners use a process called cavitation to remove soil from instruments. Commercially prepared tests are available to test the efficacy of ultrasonic. Tests can help identify issues with internal transducers that are not producing sufficient energy to create cavitation and remove soil as intended.

**Irrigating Ultrasonic Cleaners.**

Irrigating ultrasonic cleaners are used to help clean lumened instruments. These units also use a cavitation process but employ irrigating tubes that flush solution through each lumen. In addition to the cavitation test, the irrigating lubes should be checked to ensure water is flowing freely through them. Test results should be documented.

**Washer-Disinfectors.**

Washer-disinfector should be visually checked at least daily to ensure screens arc clean and that rotating arms are properly attached, rotating and unclogged. Washer-disinfectors can use several solutions during a processing cycle. Enzymatic solutions, detergents, and instrument lubricators can be dispensed during a single cycle. Steps must be taken to ensure chemicals are placed in the correct dosing dispenser and the dispenser's dosing rate is correct. Visual checks and dosing results should be documented per facility policy.

Washer-disinfectors should be tested for proper cleaning ability. Commercially prepared products are available to assist with the testing process. At the end of each cycle, physical monitors should be checked. On a washer, the physical monitor is the cycle printout or data log. The printout should be verified by the operator to ensure that the thermal disinfection temperature set by the manufacturer was attained and all other cycle parameters were met.

**Cart Washers.**

Cart washers must be monitored to ensure they are working properly. Floor screens should be checked at least daily to ensure they are free of debris. Check rotating arms or cables to make certain they are operating as intended by the manufacturer. Cart washers must also be tested to ensure they are cleaning effectively. This can be done using a commercially prepared test. Some cart washers have an instrument cycle which is validated to wash and disinfect surgical instruments. If used, this cycle should be tested at least weekly, preferably daily, on the instrument cycle program.

HIGH-LEVEL DISINFECTION MONITORING

Many items processed today, such as flexible endoscopes, some respiratory therapy equipment, and other heat-sensitive, Class 2, semi-critical items, are high-level disinfected. The high-level disinfection (HLD) process contains many variables that can render it ineffective; therefore, it is important to carefully monitor the process. Surveying agencies review disinfection records as carefully as they review sterilization records.

**Chemical Disinfection Monitoring**

Test strips are used to ensure the minimum effective concentration (MEC) of the disinfectant solution.

**When a new bottle of test strips is opened:**

-   Test the efficacy of the strips, according to the manufacturer's IFU.
-   Document the date the test strips are opened and the final date the strips *may* be used, per the manufacturer's IFU.
-   Document the test results, per facility policy.

Endoscope Processing Equipment

Cleaning medical devices intended for HLD is a complicated process that may require different equipment. Equipment must be monitored for functionality prior to use, and the test results should be documented.

**The following are some examples of equipment that must be checked daily or prior to use:**

-   Leak testers
-   Manual
-   Automated
-   Automated irrigation flushing devices
-   Cleaning device verification

**Verification:** Procedures used by healthcare facilities to confirm that the validation undertaken by the equipment manufacturer is applicable to the specific setting.

Manual Disinfection

**Documentation of the manual disinfection process should include the following:**

-   Date
-   Time in HLD solution
-   Time out of H LD solution
-   Test strip results - M EC
-   Expiration date of test strips and disinfecting solution
-   Items disinfected

**Note**: Some products also require solution temperature to be recorded.

**If the disinfected item is a flexible or rigid endoscope, the following must also be documented:**

-   Name of the technician who cleaned the endoscope
-   Patient identifier for whom the endoscope was used

Automated Endoscope Preprocessor Monitoring

Automated Endoscope Reprocess – A E R monitoring , is used to disinfect endoscopes using an automated process. While this process is less labor intensive than the manual method, monitoring is still just as important.

As with manual disinfection, the disinfecting solution in the AER must be tested for each cycle. The AER manufacturer's I FU must be followed to ensure proper testing of the disinfecting solution. Most types of A E Rs have a physical printout of the cycle available after the cycle is complete. This printout should be reviewed to ensure all parameters were properly met. Technicians should then sign the printout to show the cycle has been reviewed.

Some AERs have a computerized control panel that allows the input of items sterilized in each cycle. If this feature is not available, the items must be manually documented. With the exception of the printout, documentation for AER disinfection is the same as with the manual system. Most AER processors use a water filtration system with micron fillers that require changing periodically. Filter changes may occur monthly, quarterly or annually. Responsibility for changing filters may lie solely with the SPD or with Biomedical Engineering, or it may be a shared responsibility. Regardless of ownership, documentation of filter changes should be recorded and easily retrievable.

STERILIZATION AREA

The sterilization process requires a monitoring system to help ensure parameters needed for sterilization are met. Sterilization of medical devices is difficult to prove without culturing the sterile items, which would contaminate the device during the process. Because it is difficult to prove an item's sterility, SP technicians must rely on sterility assurance factors needed to achieve sterilization such as physical parameters, chemical and biological indicators. By carefully monitoring the parameters needed for sterilization, SP technicians can determine which items have been sterilized and are safe for patient use.

These sterilization monitoring protocols are an important part of the SPD's monitoring and quality assurance systems. Several control measures must be used to ensure the conditions within the sterilizers are adequate to achieve sterilization.

**Chemical Indicators**

Sterilization CIs help to confirm that packages have been properly exposed to the sterilization process. ANSI – A A MI ST-79 states, Chemical indicators are designed to respond with a chemical or physical change to one or more of the physical conditions within the sterilizing chamber.

**There are two basic types of CIs**: Internal CIs that are placed inside a package to be sterilized, and External CIs that are placed on the outside of packages. CIs provide a visual indication to help identify possible sterilization failures. They can detect problems with incorrect packaging, loading or other procedures, and can also detect certain equipment malfunctions such as air leaks, wet steam and inadequate temperature. CIs are an integral part of the sterilization monitoring program and are used in conjunction with physical monitors and Bis to demonstrate the efficacy of the sterilization process.

After sterilization, process indicators are examined by the SP technician to ensure complete exposure. If processes, such as packaging and loading, have been performed correctly, the CI will have changed color. By contrast, an incomplete color change indicates a failure in the sterilization process and may provide the first sign that part or all of a load has not been properly sterilized. While CIs do not verify sterility, they are an important part of the larger sterilization monitoring system. When a CI fails, SP technicians must follow established policies and procedures, which should include an investigation and documentation of the failure and any action taken.

**External CIs**

External CIs are often the first performance test the user sees upon removing a package from the sterilizer. They provide instant results and visual evidence that the package was exposed to a sterilant. Every item sterilized in a healthcare facility should have an external CI. Items processed that do not have an external CI must be processed again with the appropriate indicator.

**Note:** External CIs do Not indicate that the item is sterile.

External process indicators, including tape, load cards or labels on the outside of the packages, are also examined before the items are dispensed or opened to ensure that proper processing has occurred.

**Internal CIs**

Internal CIs are placed inside a package and provide evidence that the sterilant penetrated the package.

**Note:** Internal CIs do Not prove sterility.

CIs should be placed in the area of the package, tray or container considered to be least accessible to sterilant penetration.

**Note:** This location is not necessarily at the center of the package, tray or container.

If the interpretation of the CI in a package, tray or container suggests inadequate sterilant penetration, the contents cannot be used and should be returned to the SPD for investigation. If there is no Cl found in the tray or container, the item must not be used and it should be sent to the SPD for processing.

**Note:** It is possible to have One unacceptable indicators in a load because of improper packaging or loading, with the remainder of the load being acceptable.

**CIs showing a "fail" result require further investigation to determine the cause. The following could cause a Cl test failure:**

-   Utility or sterilizer malfunction
-   Inappropriate sterilizer loading techniques
-   Not using the correct CI monitor.
-   Wrong cycle selected
-   Poor storage of the CI indicator
-   Improper packaging techniques

Some facilities use CIs that consist of heat-sensitive dye applied to a cardboard strip, or a dye that moves along a window. When exposed to a sterilant, these devices gradually change color, thereby integrating a time component to the measurement. These types of CIs are called integrators.

Physical Monitoring

Physical monitors include time, temperature and pressure recorders, displays, digital printouts, and gauges. During and at the end of the cycle, and before items are removed from the sterilizer, the operator should review the monitor to ensure all cycle parameters were met.

**Examples of physical monitors**

Upon completion of the cycle, the operator must sign the chart as proof that it was monitored and that all sterilization parameters were met. Physical monitors are needed to detect equipment malfunctions as soon as possible so appropriate corrective actions can be taken.

If there is any indication of malfunction, the department manager or designee must be notified immediately. The load should be considered unsterile, and the sterilizer should be removed from service. It should not be reused until the problem is corrected. SP technicians should document the failure and recall actions taken and verify that all items in the load were retrieved.

Biological Indicators

BIs are one of the most important sterilizer monitors available to the SP technician. Bis are usually ampules that contain a paper strip impregnated with a predetermined amount of live bacterial spores and a solution of growth media. The growth media provides a source for any remaining live bacteria to feed on after sterilization, thus allowing bacteria to grow and be detected. The type of bacteria varies with the method of sterilization.

Spore­ producing bacteria that are most resistant to the specific method of sterilization are used. Thise test directly determines whether the conditions have been met to kill these resistant organisms. If the most resistant organisms are killed, then less-resistant organisms should also be killed. If the proper conditions are not met to kill the spores, the test organism will grow when incubated after the sterilization cycle.

Biological tests should be run weekly, preferably every day that the sterilizer is in use, and with every implantable device. Some facilities may choose to run a BI with every load; this can be beneficial when recalling failed loads and identifying sterilization failures sooner.

At the completion of the sterilization cycle, the BI should be incubated according to the manufacturer's IFU. The load­ identifying information must be identified on the BI in a manner consistent with the IFU. If the bacterial spores have been killed, there will be no color change or indication of life during incubation. This is known as a negative test result - no growth. If there is a color change in the ampule or there is indication of life through the incubator reading, it is known as a positive test - live bacteria, and items within the load should be recalled and reprocessed. provides an example of a BI and an incubator.

When incubating BIs, users must follow the manufacturer's IFU for interpretation of results. Some Bis may have shorter incubation times and others may require longer incubation times. Incubation times for BI tests may differ from the incubation times for the corresponding BI control.

A test ampule, called a control, should be run at least daily when a BI is run. The control and BI must come from the same lot and have the same lot number. When documenting, the records must reflect both lot numbers. A control test is the same as the BI, except it has not been put through a sterilization cycle; therefore, the impregnated bacteria will grow when incubated - positive test results. This demonstrates that the ampules in that specific lot are still viable or alive.

If the control ampule does not show bacterial growth when incubated - negative test, that means the impregnated bacteria were likely dead before sterilization; therefore, the BI test run with the items being sterilized is inaccurate and will give a false negative reading.

A negative BI result does not prove that all items in the load are sterile or were all exposed to proper sterilization conditions. Instead, it shows that all conditions required for sterilization were met. SP technicians must follow proper preparation, packaging and loading procedures to help ensure proper sterilization parameters will result.

**Reasons for Positive Biological Monitors**

Positive BI results can be due to an operator error or a sterilizer or utility malfunction. Whenever a positive BI result occurs, it must be investigated to determine its cause.

**An operator error can be caused by:**

-   **Using the wrong BI:** BIs must be validated for the mode of sterilization being used.
-   Incorrect placement of the BI in the sterilizer load - Bis placed in the wrong section of the sterilizer, under trays or on their sides may give inaccurate results.
-   Not following the BI manufacturer's IFU.
-   **Incorrect storage of the BI:** BIs stored in temperatures that are too cold or too warm can be damaged and lead to incorrect results. Storing BIs where there is inadequate humidity can also impact results.

Incorrect cycle selection

Not loading the sterilizer cart to allow for air removal and sterilant penetration around and through the load. Placing items too closely together or overloading or placing items on top of the BT can cause an inaccurate test result.

If the cause of the positive BI is not determined, the facility, department or outside agency responsible for sterilizer maintenance should be contacted for further investigation. The sterilizer should not be used until the issue is corrected.

Process Challenge Devices

A process challenge device - PCD is designed to challenge a sterilization cycle. Commercially prepared PCDs are available. PCD packs *may* contain only a CI, but more frequently, they contain a BI and a CI-integrator. For those cycles where a PCD has been developed, the PCD should be used to challenge the sterilization cycle.

**Protocols for using PCDs include:**

-   The PCD should be labeled with sterilizer load information before being placed into the sterilizer.
-   The PCD should be positioned in the chamber according to the sterilizer manufacturer's written recommendations.
-   The sterilization cycle should be run. Check the sterilizer and PCD's IFU for specific instructions.

**Implants.**

Every load containing implantable devices should be monitored with a PCD that contains a BI and a Class 5 integrating CI. An implantable device should not be released before the BI results are known. As with all cycles, the sterilizer operator should review the sterilizer printout and the results of other indicators used Lo monitor the sterilization process.

Implants should be quarantined until the results of the BI testing are available. In the case of a documented emergency, an implant may be released before the result of the BI is known; however, the BI must continue to be processed to obtain and document a final result. If, due to an emergency, the implantable items must be released before the BI has been read, SP leadership, Operating Room leadership, the infection preventionist - IP and physicians involved should be notified of the release, the facility policies and procedures should be followed, and the reason for the release must be documented.

**Sterilizer Printouts**

Sterilizer printouts should be reviewed and signed by the SP technician responsible for cycle monitoring. If all sterilization parameters were met, the load may be released. It is important for the SP technician to know and understand the parameters that must be met by each type of sterilizer in order to properly monitor the cycles.

Sterilization Load Control Numbers

**All items to be sterilized should be labeled with a load control (lot) number that identifies:**

-   Sterilizer identification number
-   Sterilization cycle number
-   Date sterilized

Some facilities use a **Julian date** on their packages. The Julian date is the number of days that have lapsed since January l. For example, January l is day 1 and December 31 is day 365.

-   **Load control or lot number: Is** Label information on sterilization packages, trays or containers that identifies the sterilizer, cycle run and date of sterilization.
-   **Julian date. Is**  Number of days that have elapsed since January 1st. also known as Julian day number or JDN.

Load control information is applied to each package with a labeling applicator gun to place an identification sticker containing the load information. Lot control numbers can also be placed manually on each package.

All packages sterilized by the SPD should contain load, lot, or batch information. Load information helps to retrieve items during recalls and trace problems such as a positive Cl test result.

**The following information should be recorded on a load log sheet and maintained for each sterilization cycle:**

-   Load control number, date, time and cycle number of the sterilizer load
-   Specific items sterilized, including quantity, department and item description
-   Exposure time and temperature
-   Sterilizer operator identification
-   Results of biological testing

By contrast, verification is performed by the healthcare facility to confirm that the validation undertaken by the manufacturer is applicable to the specific equipment and settings in their facility.

This documentation ensures that cycle parameters were monitored and met and helps personnel determine whether a recall is necessary.

Validation and Verification

No discussion of sterilization monitoring can be complete without mention of validation and verification processes. There is a significant difference between "validation" and "verification''.

**Validation** is done by the device manufacturer using a documented procedure to obtain, record and interpret the testing results required to determine a process consistently produces a sterile product.

**Validation** requires extensive laboratory testing and retesting of the processes that will be recommended, and the results must be appropriate and reproducible. Testing must also show that the validated sterilization process will not jeopardize the integrity of the product.

-   **Validation: Are** Procedures used by device manufacturers to obtain, record and interpret test results required to determine that a process consistently produces a sterile product.

SP technicians perform verification by documenting the procedures to obtain, record and interpret the healthcare facility's test results.

**Important Note**

While product verification can be accomplished in a healthcare facility, the parameters validated by the manufacturer cannot be changed and properly verified. For example, if a manufacturer has validated a device to be steam-sterilized in a 10-minute 270°F cycle, a facility cannot test this item in a five-minute 270°F cycle. Healthcare facilities do not have the proper products or equipment to correctly test and ensure the item is sterile in the shorter cycle. Also, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration – FDA, has approved the manufacturer’s cycle, not the healthcare facility's cycle.

Sterilizer Qualification or Verification Testing, is Qualification testing performed to verify that the sterilizer is in good working condition in the location in which it is being used. This testing also ensures that the sterilizer performs to manufacturer's specifications.

Qualification testing is performed after sterilizer installation, relocation, malfunctions, major repairs, or any time there is a significant change to the utilities connected to the sterilizer. A major repair is considered outside the scope of normal repairs. The replacement of a door gasket is considered a normal repair; however, weld repairs, chamber door replacement, vacuum pump repairs, major piping assembly repairs or rebuilds, or control upgrades are considered major repairs.

Qualification testing consists of three consecutive passing BI tests. For dynamic air removal sterilizers, the BI tests are followed by three consecutive passing dynamic air removal tests commonly referred to as Bowie-Dick tests.

STERILIZER-SPECIFIC MONITORING

In addition to the previously discussed monitoring parameters, each sterilization method may have specific parameters that must be monitored to help ensure it is performing correctly.

Dynamic Air Removal Sterilizers

**Dynamic Air Removal Test**

This test is a Class 2, CI, also known as a Bowie-Dick test and specialty indicator. Class 2 indicators are designed for specific procedures such as monitoring the effectiveness of the steam sterilizer to remove air from the chamber. The indicator paper has not turned a uniform color and the light area indicates a failure.

This test should be performed each day the sterilizer is used, at the same time of day and after major repairs. The only items that should be in the chamber during this test are the sterilizer loading carriage, and the test itself. The dynamic air removal test should be placed over the chamber drain and run per the manufacturer's IFU.

Some sterilizers have a designated air removal test cycle; check to ensure this cycle matches the air removal test manufacturer's instructions. When the cycle is complete, remove the test pack. If the chemically impregnated sheet has a complete uniform color change, the test is considered negative, and the sterilizer is read to use. If the color change is not uniform and there are blotchy areas of unchanged color, the test is considered positive, and the sterilizer should be removed from service until the issue can be determined and corrected.

Leak Testing

Leak testing of dynamic air removal sterilizers is performed to ensure there are no air leaks within the chamber. This test checks the sterilizer's ability to hold a vacuum by testing all of the scaled areas and piping to ensure air is not allowed into the chamber during a cycle's vacuum phase. Leak tests should be performed at least weekly in an empty sterilizer chamber. Leak testing is more sensitive than a dynamic air removal test, so it will detect problems before the air removal test might detect the leak.

**Note:** Refer to the manufacturer's operating manual to determine the acceptable leak test.

**BIs - PCDs**

The spore-producing microorganism used in steam sterilizer testing is *Geobacillus- stearothermophilus.* This bacterium is used because it is heat-loving and, therefore, resistant to the temperatures used for steam sterilization.

It is recommended that commercially prepared PCDs be used; the materials utilized in the packages remain consistent because they are manufactured for single use, so there is no wear or erosion of the product.

**Gravity Sterilizers**

**BIs - PCDs**

The spore-producing microorganism used in gravity steam sterilizer testing is *Geobacillus stearothermophilus.*

It is recommended that commercially prepared PCDs be used; the materials utilized in the packages remain consistent because they are manufactured for single use, so there is no wear or erosion of the product. Ensure that the PCD to be used is designed for gravity sterilizers.

**Immediate Use Steam Sterilizers**

BIs – PCDs.

The spore-producing microorganism used in steam sterilizer testing is *Geobacillus stearothermophilus.*

BIs are processed in immediate use steam sterilizers I U S S, without a PCD. This is because items are processed unwrapped or in special containers designed for IUSS. BI ampules should be run in I U S S per the manufacturer’s IFU. Bis should be run at least weekly, preferably each day the sterilizer is used, and with every load containing an implantable item. Similar to the processing of BIs in SP, BI tests in an I U S S cycle should be performed with a control of the same lot.

IUSS monitoring includes detailed record keeping so patients can be monitored if necessary. When an I USS cycle is run, the following information should be documented:

-   Date and time of sterilization cycle
-   Sterilizer identification - ID
-   Cycle temperature and sterilization time
-   Items being sterilized
-   Patient ID
-   Reason for sterilizing the item using I U SS
-   CI results
-   BI results

**Multiple Cycle Testing.**

Some dynamic air removal and immediate use steam sterilizers have the ability to operate in either a dynamic air removal mode or gravity mode. If a sterilizer is used in both sterilization methods, then BI -PCD testing must be done at least weekly (preferably daily) in both modes.

Tabletop Steam Sterilizers

**BIs - PCDs**

The spore-producing microorganism used in tabletop steam sterilizer testing is *Geobacillus stearothermophillus.* Commercially prepared PCDs are currently not available for tabletop sterilizers. Types of items sterilized vary greatly from facility to facility, creating a standard PCD would be extremely difficult.

**To create a PCD for the tabletop sterilizer:**

-   Select a tray of instruments or package that represents the most difficult item routinely sterilized in the tabletop sterilizer.
-   Once the tray or pack has been identified, it should be used for each test performed.
-   Place at least one BI and at least one CI in the most challenging area of the tray or pack to sterilize.

After a major repair to a tabletop steam sterilizer, three consecutive test cycles with a PCD should be run, and the results should be read before the sterilizer is put back into use.

Ethylene Oxide Sterilizers

BI - PCDs

BIs are the most acceptable means of providing quality assurance monitoring for ethylene oxide - EO sterilization. Like Bis used in steam sterilization, an EO BI has a carrier that has been inoculated with a known population of a microorganism that is highly resistant to the sterilant. The microorganism of choice for EO is the *Bacillus atrophaeus* spore. It is assumed that killing all spores on a standardized BI indicates a successful sterilization cycle; this is because the BI's population and resistance exceeds that of the bioburden on items being sterilized.

**Note:** This assumption only applies to properly cleaned, prepared, packaged and loaded supplies. It is required that a PCD be run in every EO load.

**Remember the four Rs. A** Process monitoring consists of the four Rs: **run, read, record and retain**. No single monitoring product provides all information necessary to ensure effective sterilization; therefore, recommended practices state that available information from physical, chemical and biological indictors should be used to assess the process before releasing a load.

Hydrogen Peroxide Sterilizers

There are several different types of hydrogen peroxide H2O2 sterilizers available in today's healthcare market; however, the basic monitoring requirements remain the same for all types of H2O2 sterilizers.

**BIs and PCDs**

BIs are the most accepted means for providing quality assurance for hydrogen peroxide H2O2 sterilizers. The microorganism of choice for H2O2, is the *Geobacillus stearothermophilus* spore because this bacterium is the most difficult to kill using H2O2 methods. A BI- PCD should be run at least each day the sterilizer is used, but preferably in every load. Commercially prepared PCDs are available; however, they are sold to monitor specific sterilizer models. Ensure the correct PCD is being used for the sterilizer.

PERSONNEL MONITORING

Personnel monitoring can involve several different types of devices. One type of monitoring system uses a badge-type monitor that affixes directly to the employee's clothing in the breathing zone (within one foot of the person's nose). Area monitors are also commonly used. These measure the quality of air in a specific area and alarm if air quality levels are breached.

STAFF EDUCATION

Tasks performed by SP technicians require specific knowledge and skills. The safety of both staff and patients depends on proper execution of specific skills. New instruments, equipment, standards and regulations make ongoing education necessary for even the most experienced SP technicians.

SPDs must provide evidence of the training and education provided for staff. That evidence is usually contained in training documents, competencies and continuing education records.

**Training Documents.**

When a new employee enters the SPD or when an existing employee moves to a new position within the department, the formal process of orienting and training the staff member to their new responsibilities begins. The process should follow a carefully designed training plan that will prepare the employee to correctly perform the required duties. Training and/or orientation documents must be kept on file for each employee as evidence that formal training occurred.

**Competencies.**

Employee competency records are an important monitoring tool for the SPD. Competencies provide evidence that the employee understands specific tasks and is qualified to perform them. Competency records are important for the growth of the department and serve as a basis for a quality improvement program.

Detailed, step-by-step lists should be developed and utilized for each task performed within the SPD. Competencies should be done during initial orientation, whenever a new device is received, when updated instructions are received, and on a routine basis for daily SP tasks. Some competencies will need to be done annually, example, tasks pertaining to sterilizer operation and documentation and when processing endoscopes, while other job duties, such as wrapping techniques, may only need to be done when issues arise or on a rotating basis. Competency records can be reviewed to determine areas where each employee excels or where more training is needed. They can also be used to show process improvement.

**Continuing Education Records.**

The SP discipline is constantly evolving, and SP technicians must evolve with ii. Continuing education provides a means of staying abreast of changes in regulations, standards, technology, scientific knowledge, and equipment. Continuing education records provide evidence that the employee has kept current and is aware of new best practices. provides an example of an employee Inservice, a common method used to help educate SP staff. Education records should be kept on file for all SP employees and should be monitored to help ensure they are current.

In CONCLUSION.

Properly and consistently monitoring the SPD and processing equipment helps ensure patient and staff safety. It also helps ensure the consistent production of high-quality products. Every member of the SPD must monitor the environment, work practices, mechanical processes, and training and education to ensure that standards, regulations and best practices are properly and consistently followed.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Monitor**
-   **Verification**
-   **Load control number**
-   **Julian date**
-   **Validation**

This concludes chapter 17. Thank you
