Chapter 18.

**Quality Production and Monitoring.**

Learning Objectives

As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to Define quality and process monitoring in the context of Sterile Processing operations

1.  Explain common quality programs
2.  Discuss how to manage quality

INTRODUCTION

Healthcare consumers demand **quality** in the products and services they receive. They expect nothing less than the best for themselves and their loved ones while using healthcare services. Sterile Processing (SP) technicians must establish and monitor appropriate quality levels for the products and services they produce and ensure that these levels are consistently maintained.

SP technicians directly serve **internal customers,** physicians, nurses and other professionals working in the facility. The success of SP depends upon satisfying the needs of these internal customers so caretakers can best serve the patients. Quality or lack of quality, can have dramatic consequences on the health and safety of both patients and facility personnel. Providing quality products and services directly impacts patient outcomes and significantly impacts the success of the department and healthcare facility.

-   **Quality: is** The consistent delivery of products and services according to established standards.

Quality "integrates" the concerns for the customers including patients and user department personnel with those of the department and facility.

-   **Internal Customer: Are the** physicians, nurses and other professional personnel served by Sterile Processing personnel.

negligent. While this may seem unreasonable, it is important to understand that just one error can cause significant harm to patients and employees.

**What Is Quality?**

The concept of quality relates to the degree or grade of excellence of a product or service. For example, a procedure cart that was not properly stocked may be sent to the Emergency Department - (ED). Even if the ED staff had everything they needed, they may still notice that items were missing from the carts. In short, quality is measured through the eyes of the customers, and their concerns relate to both products and service. Quality monitoring requires the department to maintain and/or improve their quality process constantly.

The patient must be at the center of every quality concern. SP technicians must provide properly processed products when they are needed. Just being "good" is not good enough. A surgical tray delivered to the Operating Room - OR on time but with incomplete or incorrect instruments does not represent quality service and can cause a patient to have a less-than-desirable outcome due to instrumentation problems. SP technicians accept this responsibility and the challenge to consistently meet requirements.

Looking at functions from the customer’s perspective allows the SP team to critically review its processes to determine where improvements can be made.

**Remember that:**

SP technicians are an integral part of quality service throughout the healthcare facility. SP technicians are now processing medical devices for surgery centers, physician's offices, off-site clinics, nursing rehabilitation facilities, dental offices, and third-party preprocessors. With antibiotic-resistant bacteria, deadly viruses, ever-increasing complexity of surgical

instrumentation and increasing news coverage of poor-quality services and outcomes, it has never been more challenging and rewarding for SP personnel to consistently provide quality products and services.

This chapter addresses several established quality SP indicators and how to increase and maintain quality processes within SP departments (SPDs). The ultimate goal is high-quality patient care. This can best be achieved through comprehensive training programs and ongoing quality monitoring.

QUALITY IN SP OPERATIONS

Quality requires SP technicians to look at what they do from their customers' perspectives. In many respects, SP production is only as good as the last device processed or the most recent service provided. A complex surgical instrument set can be processed 100 times, with 99 sets being perfect but the final set missing an instrument that was not noted. Not only is the 100th set below the department quality standard, but the customer now remembers the defective tray and may assume the entire department is reported in a standardized format, so it shows a realistic picture of the existing department status and where the department is headed.

-   Increased education should help staff provide a higher quality of service.
-   Quality takes time, effort and participation from everyone in the healthcare facility.
-   When measuring quality, best practices provide a good starting point.
-   SP staff can use their knowledge to increase efficiencies.

**How Is Quality Identified?**

Products and services might be considered "excellent" if they meet one's needs (they do what they are supposed to do). If a new washer-disinfector is used properly, but instruments are still dirty after a complete cycle, the equipment will be judged inferior; however, if the equipment meets expectations (produces clean and decontaminated instruments), it is easier to assume that, "This is a great manufacturer, and I would purchase from this company again:

Such assumptions provide a subjective view of quality that provides no basis for measurement. What's more, they do not consider the customers' service levels. Branding is another subjective form of quality identification. If one has great experience with specific equipment, a future purchase from that manufacturer is more likely than if negative experiences occur.

What Is Quality Monitoring?

Products processed by SP technicians should always be complete and properly assembled, with no errors. Quality monitoring is the process of maintaining or improving the department's quality outputs. An internal department system should be implemented to identify inferior products before they leave the area. External department information can be obtained from customers by using the count sheets for trays, pick tickets for case carts and requested items, and/or by formal surveys designed to learn about quality dimensions from customers' perspective. Statistics from both internal and external sources should be analyzed, errors should be studied, and corrective actions should be implemented to best ensure quality improvement.

COMPONENTS OF QUALITY

Quality is not a quick fix for healthcare facilities. Achieving world-class (best in the industry) quality requires a multi-year plan to move a facility from its current quality level to the ideal (highest achievable) quality.

Top-level administrators must emphasize quality because their support is critical for success. Most problems affecting employees' ability to accomplish work are caused by systems and procedures that have, in some way, been required or implemented by leadership.

Departmental quality should be multidisciplinary as well as intradepartmental. A true quality program utilizes all SP technicians and a cross section of its customers. Many technicians believe quality initiatives are leadership's responsibility when, in fact, the SP staff should be an integral part of the team selected to develop the program (and the technicians should follow the program they developed as a team).

There are many components, like planning and environmental conditions, that are leadership's responsibility; however, these quality components, as well as many others, are a critical part of the quality input all technicians should add to the program on a daily basis.

**Empowerment**

**Empowerment:** is another component of a quality program. It drives the process of decision making and implementation down the facility's chain of command. In other words, some decisions that have traditionally been made by managers or higher-level departmental staff or administrators are now made by supervisors or frontline staff members. Empowerment is typically limited to well-defined areas such as **process improvement** changes within the employee's defined areas of responsibility.

-   **Empowerment: is** The act of granting authority (power) to employees so they may make decisions within their areas of responsibility.
-   **Process improvement: is** Activity to identify and resolve task-related problems that yield poor quality; the strategy of finding solutions to eliminate the root causes of process performance problems.

Employees assigned to specific work areas must know how to perform all tasks properly before they can be empowered. Managers must provide training about the concept of empowerment and encourage the sharing of ideas and suggestions that can lead to improvements.

It is important to remember that with empowerment comes responsibility. Decisions should be based on the standards and best practices, not on changing something that is a completely correct process for one that is incorrect but convenient.

**Leadership**

Quality requires committed leaders to help manage the data, plan opportunities, establish priorities and empower people to implement process improvements. Effective leaders define standards to be attained in quality products and services. Those standards will drive the development of strategies that address customer satisfaction and the attainment of the facility's goals.

Departmental leaders, including shift supervisors and lead technicians, should be the first line "guardians" of the quality program to ensure that all department personnel consistently adhere to the standards and priorities set by senior managers. Technicians should help their teammates follow established guidelines. Technicians can accomplish this by following policies and procedures, applying the education received in the department and interacting with new or less-qualified staff members, assisting in ongoing training and participating in daily quality control checks.

**Data Collection**

Each department must select the data that will be used to monitor its quality processes.

**Quality Planning**

Quality planning can reduce existing problems and prevent potential problems. It involves studying other facilities, thinking about how to improve, and remembering that the process (not people) is the cause of most problems. Steps of quality planning include identifying the customer's needs, comparing how the department functions to today and how it should be functioning, and system improvement. Error measurement is important to determine the current state of the department and where the department should go from there.

While tracking and improving quality are important components to an overall quality department, today’s focus is on managing the quality improvement process.

**Several principles of quality management form the foundation of a quality process:**

-   **Patient focus:** Assuring that patients' needs are the driving force in decision making, problem solving and other activities.
-   **Process management:** Placing the emphasis on managing the process rather than upon managing the employees.
-   **Continuous quality improvement:** Believing that things can always be done better and then undertaking improvement efforts.
-   **Fact-based decisions:** Basing decisions on facts rather than assumptions.

**Staff Members**

To have a successful quality program, all departmental staff members must be fully engaged with the program. While management may set the standards and goals, technicians, for the most part, carry out the processes to achieve success. Providing all staff members with a solid education foundation will help ensure they use critical-thinking skills on the job.

Employees must be empowered to address solutions to immediate problems within their realm of expertise. For example, technicians should be allowed to stop what they are doing to help another employee, or they should be able to enlist the assistance of other workers in problem-solving tasks, when necessary.

Technicians who desire additional responsibilities should be allowed to work on longer-term problem-solving projects. This may be done with the use of **cross-functional teams** that select a process problem, analyze it, develop alternatives, offer solutions and make implementation suggestions. It is important for senior leaders to recognize superior staff.

-   **Cross- functional team: is** Group of employees from different departments within the healthcare facility that works together to resolve operating problems.

**Process Management**

Studying processes is critical because process problems cause errors. If errors are identified and resolved, patients and customers will experience fewer problems. Also, SP technicians will have greater success in consistently delivering products and services that meet quality standards.

**Some processes commonly studied for improvement are:**

-   Instrument set turnaround times
-   Instrument set accuracy
-   Surgical case cart accuracy
-   Inventory fill rates

The highest levels of quality are difficult to attain and maintain. When quality is not emphasized, inconsistent products, service delays, negative patient outcomes, and employee conflicts can arise. These problems contribute to higher costs for the facility and the patient, and lower revenues for the healthcare facility.

QUALITY CONTROL INDICATORS

**Purpose of Quality Control Indicators**

SP quality control indicators are often used to determine how well the department is meeting its objectives. Several quality indicators should be monitored periodically.

**Some examples of SP quality indicators are:**

-   Customer departments receive S TAT or urgent medical supplies within five minutes of the request.
-   Only sterile supplies with current dates are available on unit supply carts.
-   Sterilization processes are acceptable, based upon results of physical indicators and chemical and biological indicators (CIs - BIs).
-   Instrument sets contain clean, functional and correct contents.
-   Patient care equipment and supplies are available and in proper working condition.
-   Instruments are available for scheduled procedures to avoid the use of I USS.
-   BIs accompany every load that requires biological monitoring.
-   Case carts contain correct contents.

Failure Mode and Effects Analysis

**Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA):** has its origins in the military and industrial fields and is a method of identifying and preventing problems with products and processes before they occur. For new processes, it identifies potential bottlenecks or unintended consequences prior to implementation. It is also helpful for evaluating an existing system or process to understand how proposed changes will impact the system.

The FMEA process seeks to accomplish several things. First, it aims to define the topic that must be addressed (e.g., replacing a hospital boiler) and then a group of multidisciplinary staff is assembled to identify possible hazards and causes (e.g., poor steam quality, pipe ruptures, and service disruption). Finally, the team identifies actions and outcomes for each potential problem.

For example, before replacing the boiler, it may be important to rent a temporary steam generator to use if problems arise so the food service department, OR and SP may remain.

Root Cause Analysis

**Root cause analysis or RCA:** is a reactive process that looks at an adverse outcome (error) to help prevent its recurrence. Assume, for example, that a washer-disinfector's pump malfunctioned and caused instruments to be cleaned improperly. Each event after the pump failure would be examined to determine what could have occurred and what can be done to prevent this issue in the future.

Another example is the tip of a carbide insert on a needle holder breaking during surgery. All members involved with the set will meet to determine what happened and how to prevent a recurrence.

**Members of this group should include:**

Surgeon - (How was the instrument used?)

Scrub technician and circulating nurse. What happened? Was the instrument checked before giving it to the surgeon?

SP manager and the technician who assembled the tray. What are the set policies and procedures for instrument assembly or testing? Was the instrument checked properly?

Risk manager usually serves as meeting facilitator

Any other interested parties. Instrument repair technician or Infection Prevention personnel

**RCA:** is widely utilized in the medical field to examine contributing factors to adverse events.

-   **Failure mode and effect analysis or F M E A:** A process designed to predict the adverse outcomes of various human and machine failures to prevent future adverse outcomes.
-   **Root cause analysis - (RCA):** A method of problem solving that "looks backward" to identify the root cause of a problem to help prevent its future occurrence.
-   **Sentinal event: is** An unexpected occurrence involving death, serious physical or psychological injury, or the risk thereof.

QUALITY PROGRAMS

**Quality assurance** programs should be comprehensive and pertinent to the individual SPD. The type of data collected should reflect the areas where SP needs improvement, or the high-risk processes performed by the department's technicians.

Because of the wide variety of tasks that are performed in SPDs, many facilities develop their own quality program utilizing a combination of several of the different types of programs. As long as the program works for the facility and emphasizes the main focus of quality patient care, it doesn't matter which program or combinations of programs are used.

-   **Quality assurance: is** A comprehensive and measured effort to provide total quality. Also, a technical, statistical sampling method that measures production quality.
-   **Total quality improvement (T QI): is** The concept of measuring the current output of a process or procedure and then modifying it to increase the output, increase efficiency, and or increase effectiveness.
-   **Processes: is** A series of work activities that produces a product or service.
-   **Continuous quality improvement - CQI: is** A scientific approach that applies statistical methods to improve work processes.
-   **Total quality management – T QM): is** A quality management approach based on participation of all members aimed at long-term success through customer satisfaction and benefits to all members of the organization and society.
-   **Six Sigma: is** A quality process that focuses on developing and delivering near-perfect products and services.
-   **Lean: is** A quality process that focuses on eliminating waste in the production of products.

Quality at Work

Being an active participant in any quality process helps ensure the solutions generated are workable for everyone involved. Whether the activity involves the SP workgroup or a broader, cross-functional team, taking the time to examine processes and identify opportunities for improvement is worthwhile.

This section provides examples of some common methods to identify quality issues and improve them. Using a simple problem analysis chart fostered better communication, captured issues and gave the group information to make changes to improve their processes.

Quality-Centered Organizations and Standards

Quality efforts of healthcare facilities are also impacted by external agencies whose requirements must be addressed. SP technicians should be familiar with the following:

**The Joint Commission**

The Joint Commission - (TJC) is an accreditation organization that ensures quality standards are set, monitored and maintained by member healthcare facilities. It has established many health and safety program requirements for patients and staff using recommended practices and guidelines from agencies and associations, including the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation – A AMI. Routine and unannounced inspections are used to monitor standards, and each member facility is graded on its performance. TJC requires that any sentinel event be reported thoroughly investigated to correct the causes.

INSTRUMENTS AND ITEMS PROCESSED

**Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services**

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services – C M S is a government agency that focuses on quality in healthcare as well as patient safety and security. Like T JC, C MS performs announced and unannounced surveys of healthcare facilities to ensure industry standards and regulations are being followed and maintained, and that high quality patient care is the outcome.

**National Committee for Quality Assurance**

The National Committee for Quality Assurance - (N C QA) is a nonprofit organization dedicated to improving healthcare quality. The organization is known for assisting healthcare facilities in identifying how to prioritize quality goals, measure them and promote ongoing quality improvement.

Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems Survey and Value-Based Initiatives

The Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems or H CAHPS - pronounced H-caps, is a standardized survey tool. Hospitals utilize survey results to measure the patient's perception of their experience during hospitalization.

**Three broad goals shape HCAHPS:**

1.  The standardized survey allows meaningful comparisons of hospitals from the patient's perspective.
2.  Public reporting of HCAHPS results creates new incentives for hospitals to improve their quality of care.
3.  Public reporting serves to enhance accountability in healthcare.

The value-based purchasing initiatives compare a hospital's H CA H PS scores in a baseline period to those in a later performance period. Healthcare facilities that do not reach H CAHPS goals are penalized through reduced government reimbursement.

**International Organization for Standardization**

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO, commonly referred to as the International Standards Organization) provides ISO 9000 and 900 I, international standards that companies use to ensure their quality system is effective. This process is believed to guarantee that a company consistently delivers quality services and products. ISO 9000 is the definition of quality management system; ISO 900I are the requirements needed to meet ISO 9000. While many healthcare organizations have subscribed to ISO standards, few SPDs have applied or qualified for ISO status.

QUALITY IN SP WORK AREAS

There are many quality processes that all SP technicians must consistently practice in their daily routine. This section reviews some of these processes on an area-by-area basis within the department.

Decontamination Area

-   Always wear personal protective equipment - (PPE) when working in this area to protect oneself, other staff, and patients when leaving the area.
-   Document the temperature humidity of the area, if not clone electronically, and verify negative pressure flow.
-   Disassemble all items, where applicable, to ensure all instrument parts are accessible for cleaning.
-   Measure chemicals properly. Improperly measured chemicals are not effective cleaners or disinfectants.
-   Load and operate equipment properly. Improperly loaded or operated equipment cannot effectively clean instruments.
-   Follow all written procedures for cleaning and disinfection. Ensure that items are cleaned and disinfected according to the manufacturer's instructions for use - (IFU).
-   Check processing equipment before use to ensure it is in proper working order. Improperly working equipment can harm staff and patients.
-   Check quality monitoring devices, such as leak testers, for functionality.
-   Check all equipment monitors, like printouts, to help ensure all required parameters were met; do not release any instrument from a failed load.
-   Check each manually cleaned item for cleanliness prior to sending it to the preparation and packaging area.

**Perform cleaning verification:**

-   Ensure all cleaning equipment has been properly tested and verified as ready for use. Different pieces of equipment may have different tests that need to be performed each day of use to verify that the equipment is in proper working order. Run each test per facility policy and both the equipment and the verification tests' IFU.
-   Although cleanliness verification of most devices is performed in the preparation and packaging area, there are devices that should be tested in the decontamination area before moving the device to the next step in the process. Always use the correct verification test and follow the test's IFU. Do not avoid or rush this process because an unclean device can harm co-workers and patients.
-   Legibly and accurately document all test results per the facility's policy.

**Preparation and Packaging Areas**

-   Perform cleaning verification testing following facility protocol for instrument type and frequency. There are different types of cleaning verification tests available [protein, hemoglobin and adenosine triphosphate or A T P. So always ensure the proper test is used correctly and document all results.
-   Check instruments for functionality, cleanliness, alignment, proper assembly, and sharpness. Failure to do so could result in patient harm.
-   Always follow count sheets. Even if a technician has extensive experience performing the assigned task, changes may have occurred to a case cart or instrument set. Remember, patient care personnel require the correct supplies and devices as requested for the procedure.
-   Only use U.S. Food and Drug Administration-cleared items, like tip protectors, in any set.
-   Place the appropriate internal indicator(s) per facility procedure.
-   Use only FDA-approved wrappers and containers cleared for the specific method of sterilization utilized.

Check for holes in all wrappers and disposable filters to ensure they are intact before sterilization. Even normal handling can sometimes cause a small percentage of wrappers and filters to become damaged prior to use. Be sure containers are undamaged and the correct size for the amount of instruments in the set.

-   Never use towels unless stated in the container's IFU
-   Always launder towels between uses to avoid superheating
-   Never reuse disposable foam. Clean reusable foam between uses per the IFU
-   Never use a wrapper, filter or instrument that has fallen on the floor. If this occurs, instruments should be recleaned, and disposable wrappers and filters should be discarded
-   Use the proper external indicator on each package.
-   Document the temperature and humidity of the area and verify positive pressure flow.

**Sterilization Area**

-   Perform any sterilizer diagnostic testing or dynamic air removal tests, such as the Bowie-Dick test, prior to use.
-   Always load sterilizer carts as trained. Improperly loaded carts can result in wet or nonsterile loads.
-   Ensure each package contains the expiration date, if appropriate, and lot number.
-   Ensure the sterilizer parameters are set properly for the load contents. ll1is should include proper temperature, exposure and dry time.
-   Always verify physical indicators and Cls after a sterilization cycle to ensure the process was completed properly.
-   Run and incubate Bis per facility policy and the manufacturer's IFU.
-   Do not touch sterilized items until cool.
-   Properly complete all documentation, including load, biological and implant logs.

**Storage and Distribution Areas**

Check product packaging for compromised integrity, expiration dates and appropriate color changes of all indicators prior to placing items on shelves or removing items for distribution.

-   Ensure all shelves are clean and in good repair before placing items on them.
-   Always follow established pick sheets to ensure that all items are collected and delivered.
-   Ensure transport and case carts are clean and dry before placing items on or inside them.
-   Document all issues, returns and damaged or expired items.
-   Document the temperature and humidity for the area and verify positive pressure flow.
-   All Sterile Processing - Distribution Areas
-   Pay attention to the job at hand. Excessive visits or other distractions, like a loud radio, can lead to errors.

SP technicians should not do anything they have not been trained to do. They must always inform someone when they are asked to perform a process or function in which they lack training.

-   An SP technician who is unsure about a completed project should ask someone to check their work. This is much better than having an incomplete or incorrect item leave the department.
-   If distracted, check the entire project to ensure it was done correctly.
-   If SP technicians cannot perform at 1OO%, they should not do the project. Also, they should not start a project if they know someone else will need to finish it.
-   Recheck all work. The short time required to do so can eliminate an incident in a patient care area.
-   Remember that neatness counts.
-   Always help other staff members.
-   If something appears wrong, speak up.
-   Report inoperative or damaged equipment.
-   Attending as many educational in-services, seminars, infection prevention- or service technician-provided training. The more education SP technicians can attain, the better they will become on the job.
-   Always follow the established departmental policies, procedures and protocols. They are in place for a reason which typically is to protect staff and patients.

Remember that quality is the responsibility of every employee, and every employee must be involved, motivated and knowledgeable if the SPD is to consistently produce and deliver quality products and services.

QUALITY MANAGEMENT

Attaining and maintaining high quality SP standards is everyone's responsibility. Every technician should play an active role in the department's quality program. It is also each technician's responsibility to help or report others who are struggling with a process. Keeping the patient as the focus means helping ensure everyone is properly trained and performing at optimum levels while working in the department. Allowing a known defective product out of the department is inexcusable and can be very dangerous for patients. There are several tools that can be used by technicians to help ensure quality is always addressed:

**Performing departmental audits of each area of the department on a regular basis helps to keep the department and its functions at optimal levels:** Audits can be performed by outside departments, such as Safety or Infection Prevention and Control, or they can be done by the SP staff or a combination of these.

Technicians are a valuable asset to these audits because they know the environment and processes better than anyone else. SP technicians should always take the initiative to report sub-quality work or departmental areas that do not meet existing quality standards.

**Following the departmental policies, procedures and processing protocols:** These documents were developed to help ensure the safety of all SP members and ensure that all products produced are of the highest quality. Not following policies, procedures and protocols will result in a lower-quality product such as, missing, incorrect or soiled instruments, which may harm a patient.

**Keeping current with new technology and appropriately sharing what has been learned with co-workers and supervisors:**

As technology advances, the ability to check work becomes more effective. New products are continually being developed to help check for residual blood and protein. Better products are on the market to check for lumen cleanliness, as well as products that help ensure processing equipment is working properly. As instrumentation becomes more complex, it becomes more important to utilize technology to make certain quality products are being delivered. If there is any doubt about the functionality of processing equipment or any medical device, remove the item from service until it is properly repaired.

**SP technicians should take an active role in all process improvement projects:** Technicians are very familiar with all department activities and can be a vital asset in helping determine problems and how best to resolve them.

**Assuming responsibility for survey readiness:** As part of the SP team, each person is responsible for keeping the department ready for all facility surveys. Cleanliness, following set practices and knowing the required information about safety, disaster and department processes is a year­ round practice.

**Adopting a team mentality:** Help co-workers and accept help from them. No one is an expert on all processes within the department. Seek help where skills are not as strong and help those who need assistance.

**Attaining SP certification:** Certified technicians demonstrate a baseline knowledge in SP processes and know why they perform procedures in a specific way. This knowledge of the science behind the practices helps ensure practices will be followed correctly, thus helping ensure a quality product.

SP technicians are expected to consistently attain desired quality standards as they undertake their normal responsibilities. While this is a difficult goal to attain, it is a necessary one. SP technicians play a significant role in implementing quality within their facilities. They can, for example, consistently follow all instrument procedures discussed throughout this manual. They do not, however, work by themselves. Technicians are an integral part of the entire healthcare team. To ensure the highest quality of patient care, all staff members must work together. The sum of all contributions by all personnel in all departments represents the facility's accomplishments.

One of the most important tasks of quality management is to keep the department's quality numbers in the forefront of everyone's mind. If the numbers are sliding in the wrong direction, each technician should bring the issue forward, offer assistance as to why the problem is occurring and suggestions on correcting the issue.

When the quality numbers seem to stall or hold in one position with no improvement, study the numbers and help identify why the quality is not getting better. Technicians are in the active work area all shifts and can see potential issues. Share concerns and ideas for helping improve the quality output.

If quality levels are dropping, be open about any issues that may be causing the decrease in quality. Keep in mind, excuses don't help; however, actively working to find the reason does. Engage fellow workers to work together to find the issue. Study departmental errors to help find the cause and a resolution. Suggestions from the technicians working in the affected area will help develop a working solution.

It is also important to keep a close eye on the department's statistics. It is easier to fix a problem before it becomes a habit. Work together with co-workers to help develop corrective actions.

Last but not least, be sure to celebrate the department's successes. When a goal is met, patting each other on the back for a job well done increases morale and helps the statistics remain in the forefront.

In CONCLUSION

Improving quality may seem easier than it is. Maintaining and improving quality takes work and pride and commitment in one's job. Quality is everyone's responsibility in the healthcare environment and must remain at the core of SP operations. Paying careful attention to all policies, procedures and protocols, actively participating in all quality projects, and helping co­workers are critical cornerstones of SP quality.

A team-based approach to quality can provide measurable results that improve patient care and on-the-job satisfaction. Technician ownership of departmental quality is the key to maintaining and improving quality and being part of a well-functioning, efficient department in which everyone can be proud to work. Remember, quality improvement begins and ends with each departmental team member.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Quality**
-   **Customer - (internal)**
-   **Empowerment**
-   **Process improvement**
-   **Cross-functional teams**
-   **Failure mode and effects analysis**
-   **Root cause analysis - (RCA)**
-   **Sentinel event**
-   **Quality assurance**
-   **Total quality improvement - (TQI)**
-   **Processes**
-   **Continuous quality improvement - (CQI)**
-   **Total quality management - (TQM)**
-   **Six Sigma**
-   **Lean**

    This concludes chapter 18. Thank you
