Chapter 19.

**Supply Chain Management Within the Sterile Processing Department.**

Learning Objectives

**As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to** Explain the importance of supply chain management in the healthcare facility

1.  Define the role of Sterile Processing technicians as it relates to supply chain management

***

2.  Explain basic inventory terms used in healthcare facilities

***

3.  Explain the cycle of consumable items

***

4.  Discuss the partnership between Sterile Processing and Supply Chain Management

***

5.  Describe guidelines for handling commercially sterilized packages

***

6.  Describe common inventory replenishment systems

***

7.  Discuss the role of healthcare facilities in sustainability efforts and waste reduction

***

INTRODUCTION

A patient enters the healthcare facility for a surgical procedure. Throughout the admission process, the patient wonders, Will the procedure go unplanned? Will there be much postoperative pain? How long until I can return home? How long before I can go back to my normal activities? The patient does not typically wonder if the healthcare facility has all the supplies needed for the surgery and postoperative care. The patient assumes that these supplies will be available and safe for use in their procedures.

Providing procedural support requires a vast amount of instrumentation, supplies and equipment. Every surgery requires both reusable items, such as surgical instruments, as well as disposable or consumable items such as suture, bandages, syringes and needles. Failure to provide items needed for patient care and treatment directly affects patient safety; therefore, supply chain management in the healthcare facility is critically important.

It takes a tremendous amount of communication, coordination and planning to ensure that every patient has all items needed for their procedure. In most facilities, supply purchasing, receiving and distribution is the responsibility of the Supply Chain Management - (SCM) department. To ensure that needs are always met, the overall inventory management and distribution process requires input from users and from dispensing areas like Sterile Processing - (SP). SP technicians play an essential role in inventory management due to the many inventory items that pass through the SP department (SPD).

Inventory items that arrive in the SPD can be classified under two basic categories: **operational supplies** and **patient care supplies.**

Operational supplies are defined as items needed for the SPD to operate effectively. Examples include detergents, sterilization wrap and sterilization testing products. Patient care supplies are those that will be dispensed for patient treatment and care.

**Examples include catheters, implants and bandages.**

-   **Operational supplies: Are** Supplies needed for SPD operations. Examples include detergents, sterilization wrap, sterilization testing products, etc.

***

***

-   **Patient care supplies: are** Supplies dispensed for patient treatment and care. Examples include catheters, implants, bandages, etc.

***

Both supply categories are especially important to patient care. It is easy to see how a shortage of patient care supplies would impact patient care; however, it is also important to realize that the same would be true of a shortage of operational supplies. Imagine trying to provide clean and sterile instruments without detergents or sterilization wrap. An SPD's scope of service or responsibilities varies. Some departments provide supplies for the entire facility; other SPDs may only provide supplies for surgery. Regardless of the department's scope of service, all SP technicians are involved in the inventory management process in some way.

Case cart technicians work with consumable and reusable inventory supplies dispensed for each procedure. Decontamination technicians must ensure they have an adequate stock of personal protective equipment - (PPE) and a sufficient supply of detergents, disinfectants, brushes and other decontamination supplies. Instrument assembly technicians must ensure they have an adequate supply of packaging materials, chemical indicators (CIs), package closure supplies and other assembly supplies.

In some cases, SP professionals may need to ensure they have replacement components, such as screws, plates and pins, for implant trays. Sterilizer operators must make certain they have sterility assurance tests, such as biological indicators (BIs) and Bowie-Dick tests. For some types of sterilizers, they must maintain an adequate supply of the sterilant.

WHAT IS INVENTORY?

The term inventory has a broad meaning in healthcare facilities. It refers to both reusable and consumable items. Before beginning a discussion about inventory, it is important to become familiar with some key terms and concepts.

-   **Inventory** Reusable equipment and consumable items used to provide healthcare services for patients.

***

-   **Reusable (inventory)** Assets, such as medical devices and sterilization containers, that can be reused as healthcare services are provided to patients.

***

-   **Consumable (inventory)** Assets, such as wrapping supplies, processing chemicals, and other items that are consumed as healthcare services are provided to patients.

***

**There are two specific inventories in the SPD:**

-   **Reusable inventory** items that include items such as transport carts, rigid sterilization containers, and many instruments. Reusable inventory also includes items such as mechanical washers and sterilizers. In the healthcare facility, high-cost, reusable inventory items are called capital equipment.

***

-   **Consumable inventory** items that include supplies such as detergents, disposable wraps and sterility assurance products. Consumable inventory also has a specific life cycle. It is purchased, stored until use, used and replaced.

***

Consumable and reusable items are considered assets. They represent a significant financial investment by the healthcare facility and must be managed in a way that enables the facility to benefit from them at the lowest cost possible. This chapter focuses on the management of consumable assets as they relate to the SPD.

WHERE DOES INVENTORY COME FROM?

Every healthcare facility has hundreds and often thousands of items in inventory. Each item serves a specific purpose. Some inventory items are used regularly, such as detergents for the decontamination area. Others, like certain specialty catheters, are used less often but must always be available when patient safety may become jeopardized by delaying treatment or care. All of these items represent a financial investment and must be managed properly to keep costs down. Managing inventory is one of the primary responsibilities of the SCM department.

The S CM department is responsible for the purchase, receipt, and delivery of items to user departments. It oversees the flow of supplies and equipment coming into the healthcare facility.

Buyers in the S CM department search for and procure or purchase items using a variety of tools and strategies to ensure they are able to meet the facility's needs at the lowest possible cost.

Most health systems belong to purchasing groups that enable them to purchase items at pre-negotiated discount pricing. These group purchasing organizations or GPOs represent many healthcare facilities; they are able to negotiate contracts for products and services that enable facilities to receive special, reduced pricing.

SCM plays an important role in the supply chain by helping ensure that everything necessary to support patient care is available when needed.

Once items are received at the healthcare facility, they are checked in to verify that what was ordered was received. From there, items are placed into storage. In most facilities, a large portion of inventory items are stored in the SCM department. Then, items are delivered to various areas, as needed.

**Consignment Inventory**

ln addition to purchasing inventory items, SCM may use an inventory system called consignment. Consignment is an inventory system where items are provided to the healthcare facility by the vendor but not charged to the facility until the items are used. For example, a total hip procedure will usually require several sizes of hip implants to be available for each case. Even though there are several sizes available, only one will be used once the final measurements are made during the procedure. The facility will pay for the implant used, while the remaining implants will remain on the shelf.

Managing consignment inventory is important to SP technicians because any implant not accounted for when the vendor inventories their product will be charged to the facility.

HANDLING COMMERCIALLY STERILIZED ITEMS

When commercially sterilized items are brought into a healthcare facility, care must be taken to ensure that those items are not compromised during shipping, storage, handling and distribution. That means that those items must be stored in a manner that will protect each package from events that may render it unsterile.

Although the types of packaging may differ in appearance and feel, commercially sterilized packages are vulnerable to the same potential contaminants as in-house sterilized items. Items should be stored in a clean area away from moisture, dust and other contaminates that can compromise packaging. Dust on the outside of a package can be easily transferred to the Operating Room - (OR) and introduced into that clean environment, contaminating it.

As with every sterile package, care must be taken to ensure that the integrity of the package is maintained until use. Sterile packages should be handled gently and as little as possible. Technicians must understand storage and handling requirements and the basic information provided on each commercially sterilized package.

**Commercially Sterilized Package Information**

Unlike in-house sterilized items, commercially sterilized packages come with printed instructions that contain pertinent information for SP technicians. Most product packaging contains information regarding product manufacturer, sterility, storage and safe use.

Manufacturers employ several symbols to convey information on package labels. Those symbols are designed to provide information that is easily understandable in the small space of a product label.

**Expiration Dates**

Many medical products on the market today have expiration dates, sometimes referred to as outdates, and these are very important for SP technicians. It is important to recognize that even if a healthcare facility uses an event-related shelf-life policy, expiration dates on medical products must be checked, and items that have reached the end of their stated shelf life must not be used.

**Note:** When practicing event-related shelf life, expiration dates are considered an event.

Identifying expiration dates can be difficult because there is no standard requirement for where they are placed on a package. For that reason, SP technicians must be diligent when checking packages for expiration dates. When new products that have expiration dates are received, all staff who handle the packages should be educated on the existence and location of the expiration information.

Sometimes, a single package will contain several items within the package but will only have a single expiration date identified on the original outer package, like a box of sterilization wraps or a pouch of indicators. The pouch of indicators may contain hundreds of indicators. If those indicators are poured into a bin at a workstation and the outer pouch is thrown away, the expiration date could be lost. SP technicians must be aware of those items and have a plan or process that identifies the items' expiration dates and ensures that no expired item is unintentionally used.

Not all packages have an expiration date. Such items do not have materials that will degrade or decompose in an established, normal-use timeframe. The packages will have a statement indicating that the package is sterile, unless opened or damaged. In a storage area filled with commercially sterilized items, there will most likely be a combination of items with expiration dates and items with event-related sterility statements. It is important to know which items have expiration dates, and to check those dates each time a package is dispensed. Regularly scheduled checks for outdates, ideally monthly, can also help SP staff identify and remove expired items from inventory.

**Inspection**

Regardless of whether an item uses event-related or date-related shelf life, it must be inspected before being dispensed. That inspection is part of a multi-check safeguard. While it is true that the package will be inspected at the point of use, SP can reduce delays by identifying package integrity issues before they reach the point of use.

Inspections should include a visual check to ensure that the packaging has no holes, tears, signs of moisture, dust, or other visible damage. Packages that show excessive handling (wear) should also be identified. Expiration dates (if present) should be checked.

ITEM LOCATOR SYSTEMS

Every healthcare facility has hundreds and perhaps thousands of medical supplies. Each one can impact patient safety if it cannot be located when needed. Poorly organized storage can also lead to loss or damage, which can impact a facility's budget.

Every medical supply storage area must have a system in place that enables all employees who handle supplies to locate a specific product quickly.

**Unique Device Identifier**

The unique device identifier or (U DI) system was first introduced in the U.S. in 2013 by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration - (FDA). This multi-year planning/implementation system, when fully implemented, will be a worldwide method for identifying medical devices. As the name indicates, each medical device will have its own identification number that also identifies the manufacturer and other important product information.

**This system will allow:**

-   Tracking of medical devices

***

-   Easy identification of an item being recalled

***

-   More accurate reporting and analysis of adverse events caused by a medical device

***

-   Identification of counterfeit medical devices

***

Currently, UDI labeling of medical devices is required for manufacturers. The FDA has stated that healthcare facilities will eventually be included in this program.

LOSS OF STERILE ITEMS

Ideally, disposable items are purchased, used and replaced; however, there are times when a disposable item may fall out of that sequence. When that happens, the item is lost, which may delay patient care and treatment and cost the facility money for replacement.

Helping control losses for the facility is everyone's responsibility.

**Some of the ways technicians can assist in lowering losses are:**

-   Always placing items back on the shelf in their proper location

***

-   Always following the facility's policies for stock rotation to help ensure items are used before they expire

***

-   Ensuring hands are clean before touching medical devices

***

-   Not handling items unless they need to be handled; the fewer times items are touched, the greater the chance they will remain clean/sterile.

***

-   Using the facility's tracking system when receiving/issuing items. Document all issues.

***

-   Keeping storage areas closed to non-departmental staff

***

-   Not giving items to unauthorized people

***

-   Never taking items for personal use

***

It is easy to get in the mindset that the facility can afford to lose a few of these low-cost items; however, each loss adds up over time and can create a significant financial loss for the facility.

TRANSPORT OF COMMERCIALLY STERILIZED PACKAGES

Transporting commercially sterilized packages follows the same process as transporting in-house processed items. Care should be taken to protect packages from contamination during transport. Items should not be exposed to conditions that may compromise the sterility of the package, such as excessive temperatures, humidity or moisture.

Items should be protected from the environment during transport. The best method of transport is using closed case carts; however, covered case carts, approved transport bins and bags may also be used.

Equipment, such as carts and totes used to transport devices and supplies, must be frequently cleaned and inspected for damage. Items that are to be transported outside the facility must be contained in appropriate containment devices.

DISTRIBUTION OF SUPPLIES

**Distribution** involves moving supplies throughout the facility, usually from their storage location to the point of use. ln most facilities, this activity includes distributing consumable supplies from the storeroom or SPD to clinical units, including the OR.

-   **Distribution: Is** The movement of supplies throughout your facility .

***

The goal of distribution is to move the correct items in appropriate quantities to the right places at the right times and in the most cost-effective manner possible. The method of supply distribution used will vary depending on frequency or volume of use, peak activity times, the amount of storage space available in the areas to which the supplies are distributed, and other factors.

For that reason, it is important to note that no single distribution method is the best choice for all facilities. Each healthcare facility will need to assess its particular needs and develop a system that will best suit those needs. In most cases, different methods of distribution will be used to meet the needs of different departments.

**Carts and totes used to transport sterile items must be kept clean.**

**Inventory Replenishment and Distribution Systems**

The methods used to replenish needed consumable supplies throughout the healthcare facility must be carefully considered and planned to best manage costs, have items available when needed and minimize the supply efforts of responsible staff members. Effective systems are, to the extent possible, automatic.

**The following are examples of inventory replenishment and distribution systems commonly used in healthcare facilities:**

**Periodic Automatic Replenishment Level Systems**

**Periodic automatic replenishment - PAR systems:** Allows us to establish a standard level for each supply item stored in a specific department. This level is usually jointly determined by the user department and SCM staff. After these levels are set, there is typically no need for items to be ordered by clinicians. Instead, SP -SCM personnel inventory or count each area where supplies are housed. They check the current on-hand supply and note the quantity of each item still available. The amount needed to bring the quantity of supplies to the agreed-upon standard PAR level is determined and automatically transmitted to the SCM department or vendor who will send the required supplies.

-   **Periodic automatic replenishment -** often called PAR level or PAR system: Is An inventory replenishment system in which the desired amount of products that should be available is established, and inventory replenishment returns the quantity of products to this level.

***

**Automatic Supply Replenishment Systems**

**Automated supply replenishment systems:** use a computerized system to gather and track the issuing of patient items. PAR and reorder levels for each item are established. Clinical staff scan or push a button to account for each item removed from the inventory location. An order is generated at a scheduled time for all items that are at or below their reorder point, and the order for the entire location is placed. The supply pick list is printed and used to gather replacement products to refill the unit.

**Automated supply replenishment system:** Replenishment system in which items removed from inventory are automatically identified and tracked. When a reorder point is reached, item information is generated on a supply pick list in the central storeroom, or with a contracted vendor. Items are then issued and transferred to the appropriate user area.

Usually, automated systems are interfaced with the healthcare facility's SCM system for managing inventory. The use of these interfaces reduces the number of staff required to perform these functions.

Exchange Cart Systems

An **exchange cart system** is an inventory replenishment method that involves the exchange of a freshly filled supply cart on a user unit. Supply items and quantities on the exchange cart, as well as its location, are determined by user unit staff and SP - SCM personnel. At a predetermined time, a full earl is brought to unit. The partially depleted cart is returned to the replenishment area, and remaining items are inventoried to determine the supplies and quantities used.

The cart is then replenished with the supplies needed to return the cart back to full inventory. As supplies are removed from inventory and added to the cart, they are charged to the budget of the unit that "owns" the cart. At the scheduled time, this full cart is delivered to the unit, the depleted cart is retrieved for restocking, and the cycle repeats.

-   **Exchange cart system: is** An inventory system where desired inventory items are placed on a cart assigned to a specific location. A second duplicate cart is maintained in another location and exchanged on a scheduled basis to ensure sufficient supplies are available at all times.

***

An advantage of an exchange cart system is that it is "automatic" unless there is a need to change the cart's items or quantities. Clinical staff do not need to order these items, and SCM staff do not have to determine which supplies are needed.

Disadvantages associated with exchange carts include the need for duplicate inventory and carts. The system is labor intensive and requires adequate space to stage the carts. In addition, unless the system is well managed, numerous unused supplies will be transported back and forth each cycle. This system does work well for emergency medical supply carts or code carts, which are exchanged for a newly restocked cart each time they are used.

Procedure Carts

Procedure carts are specialty carts designed to supply a specific type of procedure. Examples of procedure carts include crash carts, urology carts and case carts. Procedure carts may be stored on the using unit and exchanged when a procedure is complete, or the cart may be stored in the SPD and delivered to the user area when needed. Each cart must be carefully cleaned, inventoried and restocked after each use.

Requisition Systems

Even when PAR level or exchange cart systems exist, it will still be necessary to order additional supplies. That usually happens because of insufficient quantities on hand or because a specific item is not included among those routinely provided. **Requisition systems** exist in every facility.

Requisition systems require users to request or order needed supplies by completing a requisition. Requisitions may be manually created or computer generated. Manual systems do not offer productivity advantages of computerized systems. Requisition systems that electronically requisition supplies typically eliminate the need for SCM personnel to re-enter ordering information from a paper order form. Accuracy and productivity improvements associated with automated data entry are lost when manual requisition systems are used. provides an example of a technician completing a requisition for special-order catheters.

**Specialty Items**

Every facility has a need for patient-specific and infrequently ordered specialty items that are not maintained in the routine replenishment system. SP technicians must understand the requisition, ordering, tracking and replenishment processes used by their facility for these items. If a patient is scheduled for surgery and a specialty item is needed, it may need to be ordered several days before surgery to ensure that it is available. If an item is not available when needed, patient safety may be compromised.

Case Cart Systems

ln case cart systems, items needed for each specific procedure are assembled in individual carts and delivered to the department where the procedure will be performed.

**There are several benefits to case cart systems, including:**

**Requisition system: Is** A method of inventory distribution where items needed are requested or requisitioned by user department personnel and removed from a central storage location for transport to the user department.

-   Reducing the amount of space needed for supply storage in the user department

***

-   Promoting more standardized infection prevention practices

***

-   Reducing operational costs associated with supply and instrument management

***

-   Allowing more efficient equipment and supply tracking

***

In a case cart system, specific needs for each procedure are identified by users. These needs are compiled on a requisition form, called a preference card or pick list. The preference card usually contains two components: the first is a list of instruments, supplies and implants needed for the specific procedure; the second component contains notes that are helpful to the procedure room staff.

When a procedure is scheduled, a copy of the list of needed items is sent to the SPD, and the case cart is assembled. That case cart is delivered to the OR or other user unit before the procedure. Additional unanticipated needs are communicated to SP professionals, as necessary, and the SPD responds to those additional requests.

Case cart systems can also provide effective control of supplies and instruments. Because a separate case cart is assembled for each individual procedure, it is easier to track what is actually used and identify supplies and instruments that are often requested but seldom used. Quantities of supplies can then be reduced, which can reduce the amount of inventory that must be on hand as well as reducing unnecessary repetitive handling. Close monitoring of instrument usage allows the facility to shift instruments that are not being used to other areas where they are needed. Monitoring can also identify instrument shortages, which may be addressed with scheduling changes or the purchase of additional instrumentation.

Case cart systems rely on user input to be effective. Physicians and other healthcare personnel utilizing the case cart must identify their specific needs in advance. These needs are then transferred to pick lists that SP staff use to assemble each cart. Care should be taken when developing requisitions to ensure that products are standardized whenever possible. Routine follow up is needed to adjust requisition quantities to actual usage. Properly stocked case carts should be delivered to the user unit. Personnel assigned to the case cart area must maintain direct contact with user staff so additional items can be supplied as needed.

While case cart systems typically use carts assembled as needed for specific procedures, most systems also utilize some form of preassembled carts that remain assembled and "on standby" for emergency situations. These carts are used for STAT situations (e.g., emergency cesarean sections) when there is no time for cart assembly.

An effective case cart system requires effective communication between OR and SP personnel. As cases are performed, SP and OR staff must be in constant communication to ensure that items are correct and arrive on time. Personnel in each department must be familiar with one another's routine duties and workflow patterns. Frustration can be eliminated if, for example, OR personnel understand the steps involved in processing instruments for another case. Instead of questioning instrument turnaround times, they will understand that this time is required for safe, effective cleaning, inspection, assembly and sterilization/ cooling.

SP technicians working with case cart systems should have good medical terminology skills and a thorough understanding of surgical instruments so they can easily communicate with their OR counterparts. They must also remain up to date about new products because they serve as the link between the inventory system and the user department. Along with effective oral communication skills, case cart systems rely heavily on written procedures and communications. Personnel from all user departments must establish procedures for product handling, outage notification, and scheduling. Even the best-planned case cart system will be substandard without effective communication.

Case cart systems also require upkeep. As instruments and supplies are added to or removed from the system, physician's preference cards must be updated to reflect changes in the system.

Case cart systems require significant input from SP professionals, and to be efficient, they require a full array of processing skills and inventory management methods.

STAT Orders

Emergency supply orders resuming immediate action (STAT orders) are a reality in every facility. STAT orders can also occur for a procedure scheduled for the next day if the item is unavailable. These orders are time consuming and costly to fill, and they usually disrupt routine inventory management activities. Consider, for example, times when additional external resources, such as overnight air shipments or borrowing from another facility, may be required. All reasonable efforts to minimize the need for STAT requests should be made; these efforts include reviewing why they occur and how they can be prevented.

Many S TAT requests result from deficiencies in a poorly managed daily supply and distribution system. S TAT requests can become a patient safety issue if the root cause is not addressed, and routine reviews may determine if PAR level adjustments will help ensure appropriate inventory levels. When STAT requests result from improper planning by clinical staff, SCM and SP managers should assist in the planning and education efforts to resolve the issue. While OR staff cannot predict that an emergency patient will require a specific non-stock item, they may be able to plan for such a need and ensure that the item is available.

-   **Non-stock items: Are** Items not carried in the central storeroom or in the Sterile Processing storage area but that are purchased from an outside vendor, as needed, and then delivered to the requesting department.

***

SUSTAINABILITY

The SCM department is often involved in **sustainability** efforts. Increasingly, healthcare facilities are taking sustainability into consideration when selecting supplies. Items that can be recycled or otherwise help reduce waste can benefit patients, healthcare facilities and the environment.

-   **Sustainability: Are** Processes designed to reduce harm to the environment or deplete natural resources, thereby supporting long-term ecological balance.

***

Many facilities are moving toward systems that allow them to reduce the amount of waste being generated. SPDs may be involved in those efforts.

THE ROLE OF SP IN INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

Although the primary responsibilities of procurement, receiving, storage and distribution may be performed outside the SPD, SP technicians still play an important role in the healthcare facility's inventory management system. SP technicians are responsible for several key duties, including:

**Learning processes at their specific healthcare facility such as:**

-   How orders are placed

***

-   How to identify items

***

-   How to locate items

***

-   How to properly dispense items

***

-   Knowing how to stay informed of new products as they enter the system

***

-   Understanding and following information contained on commercially sterilized packages

***

-   Handling sterile products with care

***

-   Reporting concerns such as:

***

-   Excessive, unexpected demand for specific products

***

-   Low quantities

***

-   Frequent outages

***

-   Storage issues

***

Each step in the life cycle of a sterile medical supply is an important one. Through keen observation and best work practices, SP technicians can protect the integrity of products until they reach their point of use.

INVENTORY REDUCTION

A key part of inventory management is the ability to reduce stock, instruments and sets where there is excess inventory. Standardization of instrument sets helps reduce the number of instruments needed in the facility. SP technicians can easily identify sets that have consistently unused instruments or sets that are infrequently used. Reducing the quantity of unused sets or the quantity of unused instruments in a set frees instruments that may be needed in other sets or allows the department to create more sets that are used most frequently. This process also reduces the amount of replacement instruments needed in a facility.

Technicians can also identify stored items that are infrequently used or where too much of an item is available. Procedure and case carts need to be monitored to ensure all products placed on these carts are used.

Keeping excess inventory of any type causes a financial burden on the department budget and creates more work for technicians who need to clean, inventory and stock these supplies and instruments.

In CONCLUSION

Inventory management is an important part of every healthcare facility. Managing inventory effectively and efficiently assists caregivers in providing quality care at lower costs. More importantly, it helps ensure that the items needed for patient care and treatment are available when needed.

When SP and SCM staff work together to manage and control inventory, they help create a safe environment for the patient, while increasing provider and patient satisfaction.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Operational supplies**

***

-   **Patient care supplies**

***

-   **Inventory**

***

-   **Reusable inventory**

***

-   **Consumable inventory**

***

-   **Distribution**

***

-   **Periodic automatic replenishment - (PAR)**

***

-   **Automated supply replenishment system**

***

-   **Exchange cart system**

***

-   **Requisition system**

***

-   **Non-stock items**

***

-   **Sustainability**

***

This concludes chapter 19. Thank you
