Chapter 20.

**The Role of Sterile Processing in Ancillary Department Support.**

Learning Objectives

**As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to** Discuss the role of the Sterile Processing department in supporting ancillary departments

1.  Discuss strategies for managing patient care equipment

***

2.  Explain the importance of communication and coordination as it relates to ancillary support

***

INTRODUCTION

While the operating Room - OR is the Sterile Processing department's largest customer, it is by no means its only customer. SPDs provide support for other areas of the healthcare facility by providing instruments, disposable supplies, and equipment. Providing service to diverse departments and ensuring they have all the proper items when needed can be challenging. This chapter focuses on common support services provided by SPDs.

IDENTIFYING THE SPD'S SCOPE OF SERVICE

The level of service provided by the SPD varies by healthcare facility. In some facilities, the services provided by the SPD are limited to fulfilling the needs of the OR and providing reprocessing and sterilization services for instruments used in other departments. In other facilities, the SPD may be responsible for providing sterile instruments, equipment and supplies to healthcare units throughout the facility like the Intensive Care Unit - ICU, Emergency Department - (ED), Pediatric Intensive Care Unit - PIC U and Labor and Delivery – L \&D.

SPDs that provide services to areas outside of the OR must ensure that they develop a system that meets the needs of all patients and providers in the safest, most timely and cost-effective manner possible.

PATIENT CARE EQUIPMENT

Along with instruments and supplies, SPDs may manage a large portion of the healthcare facility's patient care equipment. Effective handling of this equipment is an important part of the SP technician's job. Managing it properly can have a significant impact on the facility and patient safety.

The importance of patient care equipment was identified as one of the Top 10 Health Technology Hazards for 2022. There have been many reports of damaged infusion pumps being used during patient care, which led to dangerous and possibly fatal errors. Damage included excessive wear and tear, mishandling and misuse, poor device design, or the use of improper cleaning agents or methods.

**Patient care equipment** must be readily available when needed and be safe, functional, ready to use and free from soil and contaminants. SP technicians are responsible for ensuring that these requirements are met. They must also manage equipment in a manner that minimizes costs to the healthcare facility. An effective patient care equipment management program is essential for managing these costs.

-   **Patient care equipment: Is any** Portable or mobile equipment used to assist in the care and treatment of patients. Examples include suction units, temperature management units and infusion therapy devices.

***

Specific policies and procedures should be developed for the cleaning, preparation and tracking of patient care equipment.

Equipment that has not been properly cleaned poses an infection risk to patients and healthcare workers. That risk is magnified because the equipment may be handled by several workers during the course of preparation, storage and distribution. If it is not properly assembled and ready for use, there may be a delay in the treatment if staff must obtain necessary components such as tubing, collection devices, and pads. Equipment that is not accurately tracked can become "lost" within the system. This Jack of availability may cause treatment delays or add unnecessary expense for the healthcare organization.

There are numerous types of patient care equipment in healthcare today. Some general device categories include infusion therapy, temperature management, wound care, and suction. Examples of specialized categories include equipment used for maternal and infant care, bariatric care, patient monitoring, specialty surfaces, and beds. Many devices are cleaned, tracked and dispensed through the SPD. Specific types, models and brands will vary from facility to facility.

Basic Types of Patient Care Equipment

Understanding the purpose of basic types of patient care equipment can improve customer service. SP technicians must also understand requirements for cleaning, inspecting, preparing, storing, dispensing and tracking patient care equipment. Each step in the patient care equipment process is an important component of a comprehensive patient care equipment program.

**A Closer Look at Responsibilities**

SPDs maintain the flow of the patient equipment system. They also partner with the Biomedical/Clinical Engineering department also known as Biomed. Technicians in the Biomed - Clinical Engineering department perform safety inspections and function tests on medical equipment. They are specially trained to inspect, test and repair patient care equipment. SP technicians should not attempt to perform equipment testing and maintenance functions unless they have received specific training, complete competencies and approval to do so. Biomed technicians must also not clean used equipment unless they have been properly trained and have specific competencies geared toward cleaning medical devices.

When equipment enters a healthcare facility, it must be safety checked and tested by a Biomed technician before being cleared for patient use. These items must also receive periodic follow-up inspections, scheduled according to the equipment manufacturers' instructions for use (IFU) and the healthcare facility's policies. Biomedical professionals maintain complete records about routine checks and repairs and other important information for all patient care equipment in the facility.

The Joint Commission - TJC requires that **preventive maintenance -** PM standards be established for healthcare equipment. The following information should be recorded and maintained for each piece of patient care equipment:

**Preventive maintenance - (PM): Is** Service provided to equipment to maintain its proper operating condition by providing planned inspection and detecting and correcting failures before they occur.

-   Assigned equipment location

***

-   Ownership status (rented, leased, owned, borrowed)

***

-   Schedule for PM

***

-   PM history

***

-   Facility-defined PM standards

***

-   Repair history

***

***

The SPD and Biomed department partner in several ways. Each time patient care equipment is returned 10 the SPD for cleaning, its PM sticker should be checked. Items due for a PM inspection should be routed to the Biomed department after cleaning instead of it being returned to service. As part of their routine inspection process, SP technicians should also check for damaged, cracked, torn or frayed electrical cords, cracked equipment casings, loose knobs and switches, and other signs of damage that should be corrected before the item is reused.

All equipment that appears to need repair should be cleaned and sent to Biomed personnel for inspection. Equipment-related issues can be minimized when all staff remain alert to obvious signs of the need for equipment inspection or repair. This, in turn, increases the level of patient and employee safety. After any PM, inspection or repair made by Biomed personnel, the medical equipment should be cleaned according to the IFU prior to its return to service or storage.

Handling Used (Soiled) Patient Care Equipment

All patient care equipment used must be considered contaminated and handled as such, regardless of its appearance. In some facilities, SP technicians make routinely scheduled rounds to pick up soiled equipment from user units. Sometimes, they may also make special trips to user departments to retrieve specific equipment. In either case, the equipment should be considered contaminated and transported according to soiled item transport guidelines.

**Consider the following when transporting soiled medical equipment:**

-   Using a closed cart to minimize cross-contamination

***

-   Choosing a route that minimizes contact with healthcare patrons, by only using staff hallways and elevators if possible

***

-   Using personal protective equipment, such as gloves, when handling soiled equipment

***

-   Performing hand hygiene procedures after removing gloves and when hands become soiled

***

Disposable components, such as pads, tubing and suction canisters, should be removed from each piece of equipment and discarded at the point of use. Only items that will be cleaned and reused should be transported to the decontamination area.

**Cleaning Patient Care Equipment**

Patient care equipment should be cleaned per the equipment manufacturer's instructions and the healthcare facility's infection prevention protocols. The manufacturer's cleaning instructions are typically found in the operator's manual that accompanies the equipment when it is purchased.

Whenever a new item or patient care equipment is brought into the facility, SP technicians should receive written instructions about procedures for cleaning and handling. A review of the instructions should be performed to ensure the facility can process the item and that the facility has the required cleaning chemicals and necessary accessories. All surfaces, including cords, switches and crevices, must be thoroughly cleaned.

**Managing Inoperative Equipment**

Equipment that is not functioning should be identified and tagged by the user. SP technicians must ensure that equipment tagged for repair is routed to the Biomed department after cleaning. If an equipment malfunction causes patient harm, it should not be disassembled or have its settings adjusted. It should be removed from service and returned immediately to the Biomed department for inspection and follow-up.

PREPARING EQUIPMENT FOR USE

Patient care equipment should be prepared for use and stored in a ready to dispense, or ready to use state. Preparation for use may include assembly, the addition of new disposable components, such as tubing and pads, and a check or replacement of batteries per the equipment manufacturer's assembly instructions. Clean items should be easily identifiable as clean with the use of bags, tags or labels.

**Storage of Patient Care Equipment**

After patient care equipment has been cleaned, inspected and assembled, it should be placed into storage until needed. In some cases, storage is confined to the SPD or a secure location nearby. Sometimes, however, patient care equipment may be stored in user units. This makes it more accessible for nursing and other patient care staff and reduces waiting time when the equipment is needed immediately. All equipment should be stored in a clean, secure location, away from high-traffic areas such as visitor hallways.

Some types of patient care equipment have battery back-up systems that must be recharged. An adequate number of electrical outlets is needed in all applicable storage areas to enable these items to be plugged in at all times for battery recharge. Critical items, such as defibrillators, may need to utilize red outlets or outlets connected to emergency back-up power. These outlets remain active in the event of a power failure. While this equipment is designed to run using electricity, there may be times when patients are moved while still connected to equipment-and during power disruptions, when the equipment must rely on pre-charged batteries to function.

**Tracking Patient Care Equipment**

Tracking patient care equipment is a challenge for any SPD. The equipment is mobile and, in many cases, small. It can easily be placed in an incorrect location, set aside on a user unit or otherwise misplaced. Equipment that is difficult to locate can cause equipment shortages, which may delay treatment, necessitate short-term rental of replacement equipment, and increase the healthcare facility's operating costs.

There are several ways to track patient care equipment. It can be done manually or by using computerized programs that automate the tracking process with barcodes applied to the device. In some facilities, equipment is tracked with radio frequency identification (R F ID) computer chips applied to each device that send signals to a locator system.

**Regardless of the type of tracking system used, the main goal is to provide information:**

-   About the current location of the equipment

***

-   To charge patients for use of the equipment

***

-   On equipment usage and trends

***

Tracking patient care equipment allows SP professionals to monitor locations and ensure that equipment is available when needed. That information can also be used to justify additional equipment.

PROCURING NEW AND ADDITIONAL EQUIPMENT

New technologies and increased need and increased patient volume often require healthcare facilities to procure additional patient care equipment. New equipment may be purchased, leased or rented, or it can even be loaned to the healthcare facility by a manufacturer. There are advantages and disadvantages to each approach, and the facility should make decisions based upon its specific needs.

**Equipment Purchase.**

This method of equipment acquisition has been used by healthcare facilities for decades. Facility personnel identify the need for specific equipment, determine the type, model, style or brand that is required, budget for its purchase and incorporate it into the system. The equipment is then owned by the healthcare facility.

**Equipment Lease.**

As with purchasing, healthcare facility personnel must determine equipment needs. From there, they contract with a manufacturer or leasing company to lease (use) the equipment for a specific tune period. At the end of the contract, the healthcare facility can return the equipment (and acquire a newer technology) or purchase it.

**Equipment Rental.**

Equipment rental differs from leasing because it is usually done on a short-term basis. For example, leasing contracts may be for months or years, but rental contracts may be as brief as a single day. When renting, the healthcare facility identifies an immediate need, usually because high patient volume has created a demand for existing equipment that has caused a shortage, or because of the unique needs of a specific patient. In either case, the healthcare facility then contracts for a short­ term rental with an equipment rental company. It is important to return rental equipment as soon as the need ends to reduce rental costs associated with the equipment.

**Manufacturer's Loan.**

Manufacturers occasionally provide equipment to healthcare facilities as part of an agreement in which the facility will use the manufacturer's disposable products such as pads, tubing and sleeves. Decisions about the type of equipment acquisition process that will be most beneficial to the healthcare facility should be made by facility administrators.

**Whichever method is used to acquire equipment, the technician's responsibilities remain the same:**

-   To provide clean, safe and complete equipment

***

-   To maintain the availability of that equipment by coordinating workflow

***

OTHER PATIENT CARE EQUIPMENT CONCERNS

**Equipment Maintenance and Repair.**

All mechanical equipment must be properly maintained and will sometimes require repair. PM helps identify potential problems before they occur. PM is conducted on a routine, scheduled basis and is designed to ensure that the equipment is in proper operating condition. Equipment repair is performed as needed when equipment fails to function properly, and when it appears to be damaged.

-   **Equipment Repair: Are any** Procedures performed used to return equipment to its proper operating condition after it has become inoperative.

***

PROCEDURAL SUPPORT

**Procedure Trays and Kits.**

Procedures performed outside of the OR can be divided into two categories: those performed in a designated procedure area and those performed at the patient's bedside. In either case, safe and accurate instruments and supplies are critical to patient safety.

-   **Procedure area: Is** An area within the healthcare facility that performs invasive and minimally invasive procedures that require instruments, supplies and equipment.

***

The SPD is the provider of sterile instrumentation and often provides trays and kits for procedural areas.

**Common procedure areas include the:**

-   Cardiac catheterization lab

***

-   ED

***

-   L&D

***

-   Minor procedure rooms

***

-   Radiology department

***

-   Endoscopy department

***

Just as each procedure area provides a very different type of treatment, each area will also have different types of trays, instruments and supplies.

**Disposable or Reusable?**

When a facility determines whether to use disposable or reusable trays and kits, several factors are taken into account such as physician preference, logistics, storage and replenishment cost.

When reusable trays and kits are used, a process must be adopted to help ensure that instruments are returned to the SPD for reprocessing. When disposable instruments are used, SP staff must identify and remove disposable instruments that are inadvertently returned to the decontamination area so they are not reprocessed. Disposable instruments are not manufactured to withstand the harsh processes of repeated cleaning and sterilization.

Regardless of the type of tray used, disposable or reusable, the user department must identify the tray's contents. Both PM and equipment repair should only be performed by trained Biomed equipment technicians or the equipment manufacturer.

**Managing Reusable Instruments.**

In addition to reprocessing instruments for ancillary departments, many SPDs also perform this function for offsite entities such as affiliated clinics. Care must be taken to help ensure that the process for transporting soiled instruments meets biohazard transport and infection prevention guidelines, and that the return of clean instruments follows specific protocols for sterile item transport.

If instruments are purchased and brought into the ancillary department through a channel other than the SPD, the user units must also provide the SPD with the manufacturer's written IFU. The instructions must be reviewed to ensure the item can be processed in the department.

As with the instruments used in the OR, the SPD should develop tray lists and written reprocessing protocols for all items processed for ancillary departments.

UTENSILS AND OTHER MEDICAL EQUIPMENT

SPDs may also be involved in handling utensils and other medical equipment. In many cases, the SPD is the only space in the building with the proper equipment and facilities to clean these devices. As with all items reprocessed through the SPD, manufacturers' reprocessing instructions should be obtained, made readily available to staff, and diligently followed.

COMMUNICATION AND COORDINATION ARE KEY

Any discussion of service to ancillary departments must address communication and coordination. Meeting the needs of many departments with various specialties can be challenging; therefore, careful planning and good communication are critical. For the system to run smoothly, everyone must understand and follow the appropriate process.

In CONCLUSION.

Modern healthcare facilities rely on equipment, instruments and supplies to provide patient care. Each healthcare department fills a specific need and requires specific items to fulfill its mission. The SPD provides valuable support to enable ancillary departments to provide quality patient care.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Patient care equipment**

***

-   **Preventive maintenance - (PM)**

***

-   **Equipment Repair**

***

-   **Procedure area**

***

This concludes chapter 20. Thank you
