Chapter 21.

**The Role of Information Technology in Sterile Processing.**

**Learning Objectives**

**As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to** Provide an overview of the use of information management systems in Sterile Processing departments

1.  Discuss the use of computers and information systems to support activities within the healthcare facility and the Sterile Processing department

***

2.  Review the advantages of instrument and equipment tracking systems

***

INTRODUCTION

Sterile Processing technicians must responsibly manage the equipment, instruments and supplies in their facilities. These items are in constant movement between departments as they are dispensed, used and replaced or processed. To maintain order and ensure the availability of items for patient care,

**SP staff must track each item to:**

-   Ensure that it can be quickly located

***

-   Determine when consumable supplies should be replaced

***

-   Monitor item usage

***

-   Maintain accurate records of processes such as sterilization and distribution

***

-   Assist with quality assurance processes and regulatory compliance

***

-   Capture information for financial analysis

***

Historically, all recordkeeping or documentation performed in the SP department was done manually. Now, most departments use some form of automated information management system to track products and document processes. Some departments use a combination of manual and computerized tracking, while others employ a fully integrated information management model throughout the entire facility.

Some common types of computer-based information systems used in the SPD include those for instrument tracking, sterilization time and attendance information, case cart pick lists, patient care equipment tracking, inventory management, staffing analysis, and individual productivity data.

ROLE OF COMPUTER-BASED INFORMATION SYSTEMS.

SP technicians must maintain and manage a significant amount of data as supplies, instruments and equipment are stocked and issued to the Operating Room - (OR) and various other user departments. Computers can promote basic and advanced capabilities to support operational activities for healthcare Supply Chain Management - S CM and SP. SP technicians require a solid understanding of how computers are currently used to serve the department's core mission and functions.

Computers and information systems continue to evolve rapidly. When SP personnel are involved in evaluating and/or selecting a new computer-based application or system, they must be aware of the latest trends and technological advancements that are relevant to their role in the healthcare setting.

**Overview of Information Technology in the Healthcare Setting**

The modern healthcare environment uses information technology to provide accurate and efficient management of a very complex set of business processes. Ideally, information technology and systems are used to ensure patient safety, demonstrate quality of care and provide efficient operational and financial management for the healthcare organization.

There are few, if any, aspects of healthcare where information technology or systems are not employed. While an organization may be currently using a mixture of computerized and or manual processes, it is reasonable to assume that any of the manual processes in use are being routinely evaluated for conversion as resources and budgets allow. To support the needs of the global patient population today and in the future, the healthcare industry is intensely focused on continual improvements to the environment of care and the ability to adopt and utilize all the tools available to provide high­ quality healthcare at an optimal cost.

Increasingly, more emphasis is on point-of-care and point-of-use computing, with mobile solutions suitable for the bedside and use in SP work areas. This has become possible with the development of electronic recordkeeping systems and wireless network capabilities that provide real-time data communication. These systems can be supported with the use of laptop workstation-on-wheels solutions, tablet-based computing, and even smartphones. Computer technology will continue to advance in this manner for the foreseeable future.

**A clear understanding of the systems that can be utilized by SP management and staff is important for two critical reasons:**

1.  The core mission is to support patient safety and quality patient care. Information systems can be used to ensure these objectives are accomplished.

***

2.  Using available systems appropriately will enhance the ability to provide efficient and cost-effective patient care.

***

It is also important to understand that many of the systems used in healthcare are integrated (interfaced), meaning they communicate with each other electronically. Integration is essential for eliminating redundant data entry, promoting efficiency and reducing the risk for inaccurate or conflicting data from being entered into the system.

This is also important for the SPD because the department sometimes creates and manages information that feeds other systems. For example, if the department uses an electronic SP information system, information about inventory updates may be communicated to the OR scheduling system for use on physician preference cards. The healthcare facility's information management system utilizes many components to meet a wide variety of needs. Clinical information systems are at the heart of a healthcare provider's core mission because these systems capture data related to direct patient care.

Admissions and registration, also known as admissions, discharge and transfer or ADT systems, are used to manage inpatient and outpatient registration. This is important to SP technicians because patient census information is received from the ADT system.

The electronic medical record or EMR, or electronic health record E HR is the library of data related to the care provided to a patient by the organization. Healthcare providers must comply with "meaningful use" requirements. This ensures the certified EHR technology is being used to improve quality, safety, efficiency and care coordination, while maintaining privacy of patient health information.

Centralized patient order entry or C P O E systems are data portals used by physicians and other authorized caregivers to order tests, medications, supplies and equipment for patient use. The C P O E system also provides alerts when there are potentially conflicting orders created for a patient, such as allergies or medication incompatibility. This is important to SP technicians because automated requests for patient care items are generated by a C P O E system.

Diagnostic and therapeutic services systems are used to manage the scheduling, procedures performed, and results reported for their respective departments, such as Radiology, Ultrasound, Vascular lab, EKG, Respiratory and Pulmonary Functions lab, Physical and Occupational Therapy, etc.

Interventional services systems are used to manage scheduling, procedures performed, and results reported for their respective departments, such as the OR, Labor and Delivery - (L&D) and the Cardiac Catheterization Lab. These systems are important to those in the SPD because information is received via schedules or pick lists. about the daily needs of the SPD's critical customers.

-   **Operational systems:** are essential in managing the various functions within the organization that are not directly related to patient care.

***

Email systems are a crucial platform for managing communication within any organization. Email reduces the need for voicemail and pagers. SCM or Materials Management Information Systems or M M I S are used for managing the purchasing, receipt and inventory control functions within an organization. The supply chain system is essential to the SPD for many reasons, including inventory control and ordering of instruments and supplies.

**Asset management systems** also known as tracking systems, are used to manage the use, processing and location of medical equipment and surgical instrumentation throughout an organization. These systems serve as tools for efficiently monitoring and controlling the utilization of surgical instruments and patient care equipment.

Staff scheduling systems can be used to monitor compliance with the organization's time-clock policies, provide a mechanism to create work schedules, and analyze workforce needs and trends.

Facility systems are used to manage the physical environment of the organization. Examples of commonly found facility systems are heating, ventilation and air conditioning or H VAC for monitoring and managing temperature and humidity; fire control for managing fire alarms, sprinklers and magnetically controlled doors; public address for audible announcements; and access control for managing identification badge access to secure areas within the facility. These are important to SP technicians for managing the safety and quality of areas where items are processed and stored.

-   **Human Resources systems**: are used not only for recruiting and retaining staff, but also for managing employee benefits and monitoring compliance with regulatory requirements for staff.

***

-   **Financial systems:** are essential for managing the organization's financial activities.

***

-   **Accounts payable - (AP) systems:** Used to manage payment to vendors providing products or services to the organization.

***

-   **Charge description master - (CDM) systems**: Used to manage a list of services and items that are chargeable to patients. The CDM system is designed to communicate (interface) with other software systems to support government-mandated standard billing requirements.

***

-   **Billing or patient accounting revenue systems**: Used to manage the issuing of bills to patients/insurance payors and assist with collections of amounts due.

***

-   **Payroll systems:** Are Used to track hours, calculate wages, taxes and deductions, and print and deliver checks.

***

-   **Decision support systems:** Are Used to analyze operational and financial performance and provide key metrics to senior leadership. Decision support includes information related to the volume of procedures and services provided as well as the operational costs and revenue received. This is an essential tool used by leadership to evaluate the financial impact of services and programs offered by the organization.

***

-   **Public relations systems:** are essential in managing the public perception of the organization.

***

The facility's website is a significant portal for patients, employees and physicians to obtain information about the services and programs offered, including employment or volunteer opportunities; the facility's core mission and values; and other details such as phone directories, maps and directions. Patient portals also allow patients to view their medical records, receive and print lab results, retrieve consultation requests, and much more.

Social media portals, such as Facebook and Twitter, are becoming increasingly important to hospitals because they are frequently used by patients to express their opinion about their experience with an organization, or learn about the opinions and viewpoints shared by others.

Media relations resources include information that resides on other websites not directly controlled by the organization such as news articles on services provided.

TRACKING SYSTEMS FOR THE SPD.

The processes and needs of the SPD have changed over the years. Advances in sterilization, instrument technologies, durable medical equipment, and supply inventory are ongoing, and costs for instrumentation purchase, repair and replacement have led to a greater need for improved asset tracking and management.

**Overview.**

Tracking systems available for use in the SPD can forecast needs and identify processing costs and usage for trays and single instruments. These tracking systems can also help maximize equipment and inventory utilization to provide pertinent information as future budgets are developed.

**Tracking Methods.**

There are several types of tracking systems and methods available. Examples include the use of barcodes to scan an item's last known location and radio-frequency identification or R F I D tags used for real-time tracking of patient care equipment.

System ease of use, cost and compatibility with other software systems in use are among the factors affecting purchasing decisions. Additionally, to ensure reliability, the tracking method must be compatible with the processing practices and technologies used by the facility.

A tracking system may typically be either a traditional installed software application with a database managed by facility information technology or IT personnel or a web-based application with a database managed hosted by the software vendor and accessed through the internet. The latter, commonly referred to as **cloud computing,** may offer several advantages, including cost benefits and ease of installation.

-   **Cloud computing:** The practice of storing regularly used data on multiple servers that can be accessed through the internet.

***

Integration capabilities are important when communicating critical information to and from the tracking system. OR scheduling system interfaces are typically desirable to both the SPD and the OR because they facilitate information about instruments, supplies and equipment needs based on the surgery schedule in real-time or near real-time forecasting.

**Tracking Systems Meet Specific Needs.**

A tracking system must meet the specific needs of the facility that uses it. For example, in a multi-hospital health network, certain modules or special features in the system may be utilized by personnel at one site but not at other sites. This is generally due to differences in the complexity of processing or logistics between sites or departments. For example, a processing area that supports a small ambulatory surgery department may not have a need for the same tracking features that would benefit an SPD that supports a large inpatient OR.

In short, a well-developed tracking system has built-in flexibility and scalability that can allow SPDs to tailor the configuration to meet specific needs and allow for logical reconfiguration or changes as requested.

The continual need to update information is critical for the success of any tracking system, regardless of whether its primary use is for instrument processing, case cart pick lists, preference cards, inventory control or other purposes.

Surgical instrument sets or single peel-packed items can be tracked and located at the packaged and sterilized product level using one dimensional - (ID) barcode labels. Small R F ID tags, which can be used reliably within the sterilization process, can provide real-time location data when they are affixed to instruments or trays. It is likely that R F ID technology will coexist with barcodes because use of a barcode promotes line-of-sight inspection by the user when scanning an item. This is an essential step in ensuring the sterile integrity of packaged products.

Individual instruments can be tracked or located within a set or tray using two-dimensional – 2 D data-matrix barcodes. These are marked directly on the instrument using a laser etching process or through the placement of a dot-type label. Individual instrument tracking ensures specific instruments are kept with a specific set. It can also locate specific high­ cost, complex devices, such as powered, endoscopic or robotic instruments, for required preventative maintenance inspection. In facilities where the risk of exposure to emerging pathogens, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease - CJD, is high, individual instrument tracking is crucial for demonstrating the processing or dispensing actions taken in the investigation of a suspected or confirmed exposure.

System documentation and scanning can be done with many different types of devices. These include wireless mobile handheld devices systems wired directly to the computer terminal, fixed radio receivers that read RFID transponder signals throughout the facility, and manual entry of information into the computer.

-   The last known location of a specific instrument set, tray or equipment

***

-   Cost and value of specific equipment and instruments, and the total cost of an instrument set - Tray

***

-   Number of complete processing and use cycles through which instruments and instrument sets have moved

***

-   Usage of specific equipment

***

-   Preventative maintenance schedules and repairs made to specific equipment and instrument sets or trays

***

Decisions about system utilization should consider the specific environment to which the items will be exposed. For example, the cleaning and sterilization processes for instruments and sets must be evaluated in detail during any implementation planning process to minimize the risk of any adverse effects on the tracking system. For example, chemical agents designed to be compatible for use with instruments may negatively affects laser etchings, fade barcode labels, and make them unreadable to the scanner after repeated use. Heat generated during steam sterilization may damage R F ID tags and impair their functionality.

Water, chemicals, and drying temperatures used to clean case earls and other equipment may cause adhesives used to affix the R F ID tags to dissolve. When this occurs, they can fall off or become damaged from water leakage. As these risks are recognized, manufacturers generally respond by making improvements to components or processes to ensure reliability.

FEATURES OF INSTRUMENT AND EQUIPMENT TRACKING SYSTEMS

Instrument and equipment tracking systems can provide many different features to assist SP professionals in the facility's OR, Finance, Nursing and Administrative departments. All tracking systems include some basic operating features; however, more advanced systems include additional features to enhance their usefulness.

Basic Systems.

**Basic instrument and equipment tracking systems typically can track (account for):**

-   Complete instrument sets and trays

***

-   Specific equipment items

***

***

**Basic instrument and equipment tracking systems also provide other information, including:**

**Complete tray lists for accurate tray assembly and equipment setup, such as:**

-   The name of the SP technician who assembled and inspected the set or equipment

***

-   The date the set or equipment was processed

***

-   The sterilization and cleaning modality (process)

***

-   The catalog number and manufacturer's name to identify instruments and associated equipment and supplies

***

-   An image of the instrumentation

***

-   Any acceptable substitutes for missing instrumentation

***

-   Any special instructions required for assembly, such as tip protectors required for single skin hooks

***

-   The quantity of instruments included in the set or tray

***

-   Identification of instruments missing from the set

***

**Productivity reporting information:**

-   Sets and instruments processed and completed during a specific work shift

***

-   Sets and instruments completed by specific employees

***

-   Equipment processed and distributed

***

-   Quality assurance data for specific facility-based information such as:

***

-   Sterilization load quarantines or recalls

***

-   Biological monitoring standards and regulations

***

-   Educational and in-service documentation

***

***

**Financial data for documenting and managing:**

-   Instrument replacement and repair

***

-   Equipment replacement and repair

***

-   PM notification

***

-   PM records

***

-   Utilization of instrument sets, trays and equipment

***

-   Productivity data and staffing requirements for peak operational workflow

***

Integrating - interfacing with clinical systems allows facilities to associate or link instrument trays, sets and equipment to each patient's medical record. Today's tracking systems can also interface with sterilization and washer-decontamination equipment, automated endoscope reprocessors or AERs, and biological incubators.

**Advanced Systems.**

**Instrument and equipment tracking systems may also include some of the following advanced features that can be beneficial in certain healthcare facility applications:**

R F ID that enables real-time location of an instrument or equipment item as it moves through the facility and the processing cycle. The real-time location of a complete instrument set or tray can also be assessed. Set-level tracking features to allow staff members to know the last scanned location of an instrument set or tray. Individual instrument level tracking features that allow staff to track a single instrument within a set or tray and identify the set into which a specific instrument was placed.

**Tracking Loaned Instrumentation.**

Healthcare facilities often use loaned instrumentation. Loaned instrument tracking programs are available that can track loaned inventory in real time, provide communication to SP professionals regarding which instrument sets to expect, as well as provide instructions for use (IFU). Different types of systems are available that provide data to assist in the management of loaned instrumentation.

**Tracking and Planning for SP Technicians.**

Commitment is required for any system to work, including tracking systems. Whether the system is computerized or manual, technicians need to be diligent in performing the scanning/ location logging tasks. When SP technicians diligently perform the tracking processes, the system will provide information that allows technicians to locate devices and plan their shift. A few of the benefits include:

Device location allows instruments, sets and equipment to be located quickly. If items are in transit to the user area, the customer can be informed of the device's location and how long until it will be delivered. On busy days when instrument sets are in full use, an accurate tracking system can let SP technicians know where each set is and allows SP staff to obtain and move items where they are needed.

Video screens of the day's surgery schedule in the department allow for visualization of which phase each surgical case is in throughout the day. This information allows technicians to plan for turnaround items and allocate equipment and resources when they are most needed. Canceled or postponed case information allows SP technicians to retrieve and reallocate case carts, equipment and instruments to ORs that need them.

Devices in need of PM can be identified so items are inspected in the timeframe that their manufacturers recommend. Damaged devices are noted in the system so that time is not wasted looking for these devices. Anticipated dates when items will be returned from repair can also be available. Systems can keep track of the number of times items that have been repaired or replaced, as well as the cumulative cost of these repairs.

Technology is a great resource with benefits that can be clearly recognized. Technology can be used to enhance processes, maximize time and improve patient safety. As with any automated, mechanical or digitized process, technology can fail, break or experience disruptions. It is important to have a clearly defined downtime process when interruptions occur. A computerized instrument tracking system used for instrument assembly is an example of an invaluable tool that the SPD can utilize.

When tracking systems fail and instrument assembly cannot be completed digitally, the facility must have a back­-up plan to keep instrument assembly moving. Manual copies of instrument count sheets should be regularly updated and available when experiencing down time. This is true for most processes in the healthcare facility. Patient care must continue even when technology is not cooperating. It is important to examine the processes in the SPD, identify processes and systems that rely on technology, and plan for the unexpected.

In CONCLUSION.

SP professionals must responsibly manage the equipment, instruments and supplies entrusted to them by their healthcare facility. An instrument and equipment tracking system helps facilitate this goal by capturing pertinent data, logging and documenting processes, practices and SP-related functions, and more.

As computer-based technology and information systems continue to evolve, additional capabilities will become available to help facilities better address operational activities and facilitate high-quality patient care. Even so, computers are only one part of a total information system. While computers and tracking systems provide numerous benefits, SP technicians are the key to providing efficient and effective services to help their department support the facility's core mission, which is to provide safe, high­ quality patient care and customer service.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter.**

**Cloud computing**

This concludes chapter 21. Thank you
