Chapter 22.

**Safety for Sterile Processing.**

Learning Objectives

**As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to** Explain the importance of safety and risk management in the Sterile Processing department

1.  Review three common workplace hazards

***

2.  Explain the importance of ergonomics and health awareness for Sterile Processing technicians

***

3.  Identify strategies for accident prevention

***

4.  Describe special safety precautions for handling ethylene oxide

***

5.  Discuss the basics of a healthcare facility's internal and external disaster plans

***

INTRODUCTION

It has been said that safety is no accident and that statement couldn't be truer, especially for healthcare professionals who are responsible for keeping patients, employees and visitors free from injury.

Safety requires ongoing education, safeguards, proper planning and the combined implementation of safety systems to reduce risks, prevent injury and save lives. The Sterile Processing decontamination area is a perfect example of how safety systems and due diligence are essential for ensuring safety. The decontamination area operates in the presence of pathogenic microorganisms, which presents a real risk to those who enter. Engineering controls, such as managed air pressure, physical separation from clean areas, and personal protective equipment - (PPE), are provided to minimize risk. Employees must be educated in biohazard safety and follow specific regulations, such as those established by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration or O SHA, to reduce the risk of injury.

This chapter identifies common risks found in the Sterile Processing department's (SPD's) work areas and identifies ways to minimize the risk for injury.

RISK MANAGEMENT

-   **Risk management:** is a method used to assess the risks of a specific activity and develop programs to reduce that risk. It also involves injury prevention and claims management (the settlement, defense and prevention of lawsuits)

***

-   **Risk management:** Methods used to assess the risks of a specific activity and develop a program to reduce losses from exposure to those risks.

***

Risk management originated in the insurance industry as the result of an increased number of medical malpractice lawsuits. Such lawsuits cost healthcare facilities billions of dollars. Healthcare facilities must effectively manage injury prevention for patients and employees as part of a risk management program. Various authorities, including The joint Commission - (TJC), require that healthcare facilities develop and implement procedures to ensure they meet minimum safety standards.

Risk management programs are designed to prevent accidents and injuries and ensure accurate reporting and follow up to help prevent similar incidents. After a situation is examined and hazards or unsafe practices have been discovered, risk management personnel ensure that corrective actions are taken to improve systems, behaviors and/or physical conditions to help prevent employee and patient accidents and injuries.

By following the protocols outlined in this textbook, as well as the manufacturer's instructions for use (IFU), standards and regulations, SP technicians can support patient safety.

COMMON WORKPLACE SAFETY HAZARDS

All jobs involve some risks. The key to working safely in any work environment is understanding those risks and taking appropriate steps to minimize them. SP technicians must understand potential hazards and pay close attention in work areas within and sometimes outside of their department. The assumption that "an accident or injury will never happen to me" creates a false sense of security that results in many injuries each year. Following safety protocols and incorporating them into all work practices is necessary for preventing injuries and accidents.

**SPD Occupational Hazards.**

In the SPD, there are three different types of occupational hazards: physical, biological and chemical. Some of those occupational hazards can be present in all areas of the department. Physical hazards, such as heavy or awkward lifting, for example, can occur in any work area. Other hazards may be confined to a specific work area. For example, biohazard contamination will most likely occur in the decontamination area.

Physical safety hazards may be caused by the environment and the tasks performed within that environment. Due to the nature of the tasks performed, there are many potential physical hazards in the SPD. Physical hazards may include wet floors, cluttered walkways, heavy carts and sharp instruments. Fire is another physical safety concern.

Biological safety hazards (i.e., infectious waste and bloodborne pathogens) can potentially be found in any area of the department. Obviously, the decontamination area is the main area of concern for biological hazards.

Chemical safety hazards may be found throughout the SPD work areas. For example, solutions used in the decontamination area, sterilants used in the sterilization area, and some patient care products may pose chemical hazards within the department.

This chapter examines general safety hazards and outlines specific safety hazards by work area. The risk of injury from all of these hazards can be minimized by following safety protocols.

**GENERAL PHYSICAL HAZARDS**

**Ergonomic Concerns.**

General physical hazards include those related to **ergonomics,** slips, falls, electrical, and sharps. Ergonomics is the process of changing work or working conditions to reduce physical stress. SP technicians are exposed to many ergonomic stress factors such as repetitive motion, lifting and pushing.

-   **Ergonomics:** Process of changing work or working conditions to reduce employee stress.

***

**Ergonomic stressors that employees may encounter include:**

-   **Force**: Heavy lifting or manipulating equipment or instrument sets.

***

-   **Repetition:** Using the same motion, or series of motions, continually or frequently.

***

-   **Awkward positions:** Assuming positions that place stress on the body such as reaching or twisting while lifting.

***

-   **Vibration:** Rapid oscillation of the body or a body part.

***

-   **Contact stress:** Continuous pressure between the body and a sharp edge.

***

Exposure to these stressors can cause numerous problems, including ligament sprains, joint and tendon inflammation, pinched nerves, herniated spinal discs and other injuries.

Problems, such as carpal tunnel syndrome from typing at a computer station may develop gradually or from a single event such as from improperly lifting a heavy object. In either case, the injuries may cause pain, loss of work, and disability.

The number and severity of ergonomic injuries can be reduced if the work environment and work practices are adjusted effectively. To be effective, management commitment and employee participation are required. This forms the foundation for ergonomic improvements because a sustained effort, allocation of resources, and frequent follow-up is needed. Staff members buy-in of equipment and work procedure changes is especially important.

**Training can help employees to:**

-   Recognize the signs and symptoms of injuries, so they can respond to them

***

-   Report potential problems

***

-   Recognize jobs and tasks that present ergonomic stressors

***

-   Understand how wasted movements can affect the body

***

Conducting a work site analysis can help identify conditions and aspects of work activities that increase injury risks to employees. A work site analysis also helps ensure that the corrective actions taken address the problems that create the hazard.

In an effort to reduce body stress, including fatigue, discomfort and pain, ergonomic solutions, such as ergonomic equipment, should be evaluated for use in the SPD. The following equipment can reduce factors that cause musculoskeletal disorders:

Height-adjustable sinks: Move up and down depending on the height of the individual and can improve posture and reduce back strain and injury.

-   **Anti-fatigue mats:** Provide a cushion between the user and hard floor and create micro movements within the leg muscles that aide blood circulation.

***

-   **Auto-dosing dispensers:** Reduce the amount of time and energy needed to *move* chemical and detergent bottles.

***

-   **Auto-loading washer-disinfector racks:** Reduce back strain associated with pushing and pulling washer racks.

***

-   **Height-adjustable workstations:** *Move* up and down depending on the height of the individual and can improve posture and reduce back strain and injury.

***

-   **Adjustable computer monitors:** *Move* up and down or side to side depending on the individual to help improve posture and prevent awkward twisting or back strain.

***

-   **Printers and label makers:** When located near workstations, these can reduce waste or repetitive movement.

***

**Utility earls:** Can eliminate the need to carry instruments by hand to assembly areas and from the assembly area to the sterilizer cart. These carts can reduce back strain.

-   **Automated doors:** Reduce pushing and pulling actions. Automated doors on cart washers and sterilizers can help reduce back strain associated with pushing and pulling.

***

Simple changes, such as stretching before work, shifting positions, learning and practicing good body mechanics, and breaking up repetitive activities, can help employees reduce the risks or ergonomic injuries.

Proper lifting and pushing movements can prevent injuries. When loading and unloading carts from dumbwaiters or elevators, or receiving a cart into the department, it is essential to check the cart's weight before attempting to move it.

**Other ergonomics improvements may include:**

-   Placing heavier instrumentation on the middle shelf within a storage rack

***

-   Maintaining cartwheels or casters so they roll smoothly and without friction

***

-   Positioning equipment, such as workstations, in a manner that reduces unnecessary movement

***

-   Placing frequently used supplies near workstations

***

**Slip and Fall Concerns.**

Slips and falls are always a concern in the SPD. Mobile equipment and wet floors increase fall risks. To reduce these risks, mobile equipment should be parked away from common traffic areas. Areas that often have wet floors, such as in the decontamination area, around the cart wash exits, and washer unload areas, must be kept as dry as possible, and spills should be wiped immediately. Non-slip footwear should be worn, and attention should be given to slippery floors. Signage alerts people to potential hazards.

**Electrical Safety Concerns.**

Burns and shocks from electric equipment can result if safe handling precautions are not observed. Technicians should carefully check all electrical cords to ensure they are intact, with no breaks in the insulation. Electrical cords on mobile equipment run a greater risk of being kinked or run over by a rolling cart, which can make the equipment unsafe. All plugs on electrical equipment must be three-pronged and grounded, and all electrical outlets must accommodate these plugs.

Inspecting electrical cords for breaks and plugs for bent prongs is the responsibility of SP technicians. Identifying and reporting a potential hazard during cleaning or delivery can prevent injuries to patients and staff. Any new equipment brought into the facility should be tested for electrical safety, either by Facilities Engineering or the Biomedical - Biomed Engineering department. Be sure to review the facility's policies and procedures for details.

Insulation leakage testing equipment, or voltmeters, are designed to use an electrical charge to identify nicks, tears or breaks in insulated instrumentation. Leakage or voltage testing devices are most commonly used on laparoscopic instrumentation. SP technicians can receive an electrical shock if the device is not properly grounded, or when contacting an active electrode. SP technicians should receive training followed by competencies prior to using these devices.

**Use Caution with Electrical Equipment**

All electrical equipment can pose a hazard if it is used in an unsafe manner. For example, radios placed near water sources, such as sinks and ultrasonic cleaners, can lead to staff injury in that work area. Keep the work area safe from electrical hazards.

**Sharps Concerns**

Cuts and puncture injuries from sharps can happen in any area of the SPD. Sharp instruments can break the skin's surface and produce puncture wounds, lacerations and abrasions. If the injury occurs in the decontamination area, these injuries may result in exposure to disease.

**Some general precautions to prevent sharps injuries include:**

-   Handling all sharps with care

***

-   Not grasping several objects at once

***

-   Ensuring that sharp ends point away from any part of one's body during transport

***

-   Placing all disposable sharps, such as needles and blades, in the appropriate sharps’ container

***

-   Blindly reaching into an instrument tray. Sharps may be hidden and cause an injury

***

Sharps injuries can happen to anyone at any time. If a sharps injury occurs, it is important to promptly notify SP leadership and follow the healthcare facility's procedures, which may include following up with the facility's occupational health department.

**General Chemical Hazards**

Most chemicals used in the SPD are found in the decontamination area, although chemical hazards may be found in other areas of the department as well. SP technicians must have basic training and an understanding of how and why each chemical is used in the SPD. They must understand how to handle the chemicals and any special precautions required such as PPE. Training should also include procedures for chemical removal and disposal.

Not all chemicals used in the SPD can be disposed of by simply pouring the chemical down the drain. Some chemicals require deactivation and dilution. Competencies should follow any training performed and should also incorporate procedures for addressing accidental spills. Spill kits assist with chemical cleanup and should be compatible with each chemical found in the department; they should cover worst-case scenarios and be readily available.

Chemical splashes are a common cause of eye injuries, so the use of eye protection is required. Eyewash stations are also required in areas where chemical injuries are a concern.

**Hazardous Substance Concerns**

Each state categorizes certain chemicals and substances as hazardous. Each SPD should have an easily accessible, understandable and current list of all hazardous substances with which employees could come in contact. This list should always be available to employees and not locked away or stored in an office. Most facilities today have a comprehensive computerized hazardous chemical list.

If employees are required to perform known hazardous tasks, it is important that they understand the safety procedures developed for that task. Prior to performing such tasks, employees must be given information about the hazards to which they may be exposed. This information should include identification of specific hazards, use of PPE, recommended safety measures, and emergency response procedures. Employers should take measures to minimize employee hazards. These could include increased area ventilation, respirators, the presence of other employees to assist, and the rehearsal of emergency procedures.

SP managers must develop a hazardous materials management program to help ensure the health and safety of employees, as required by state and federal regulations. Information about hazardous chemicals and substances must be available to all employees.

OSHA's Employee Right to Know regulations, mandate that a comprehensive hazard communication program be in place to help ensure that employees know about the hazards around them. Components of an effective departmental hazardous substance management program include container labeling requirements, use of safety data sheets or SDS, employee information and training, procedures to manage and handle hazardous substances, employee monitoring, and **hazardous waste** management.

-   **Hazardous waste: Any** Substance that cannot be disposed of in the facility's normal trash system

***

**Container Labeling.**

All containers with hazardous substances must be clearly labeled to specify contents and appropriate hazard warnings, and they must indicate the name and address of the manufacturer. All **secondary containers** must be labeled with an extra copy of the original manufacturer's label or with a generic label that identifies the chemical, hazard warnings, and directions.

-   **Secondary container: Is A** generic container that is filled from a primary container or filled with a diluted solution. Secondary containers must be clearly labeled with content

***

**Safety Data Sheets.**

An S DS contains important information about product materials and properties that employees must know to work safely with any given product. S DS are developed and provided by the manufacturer of the product, and they are specific for each product.

The employer is responsible for ensuring that SDS are readily available to employees who may work with or be in the vicinity of hazardous materials. In turn, employees are responsible for becoming familiar with the SOS information and consistently following the instructions given for the products they handle and use.

S DS contains at least 16 sections.

**The following is a list of the sections as they appear in the SDS:**

**Section 1: Identification:** Product name, manufacturer's name, address, telephone number, product item number or manufacturer's identification, and synonym names

**Section 2: Hazards Identification:** List of hazardous ingredients

**Section 3: Composition:** Information about the ingredients contained in the product

**Section 4: First-Aid Measures:** Emergency and first aid, including routes of exposure, symptoms and effects of exposure

**Section 5: Fire-Fighting Measures:** Fire and explosion information, flash point, flammable units, extinguishing media, special firefighting procedures, and unusual fire and explosion hazards

**Section 6: Accidental Release Measures:** Spill or leak procedures, spill management and waste disposal methods

**Section 7: Handling and Storage:** Storage recommendations, incompatible materials, and storage temperatures

**Section 8: Exposure Controls and Personal Protection Measures:** Exposure limits, engineering controls and personal protective measures to minimize technician exposure

**Section 9: Physical and Chemical Properties:** Data, vapor pressure, evaporation rate, water solubility, freezing and boiling points, specific gravity, acidity or pH, vapor density, appearance and odor

**Section 10: Stability and Reactivity:** Reactivity data, stability, incompatibility, hazardous decomposition products, and conditions contributing to hazardous **polymerization**

-   **Polymerization: Is** A molecular reaction an uncontrolled release of energy

**Section 11: Toxicology information:** Health hazard data and effects of over exposure

**Section 12: Ecological Information:** Provides information regarding environmental impact

**Section 13: Disposal Considerations:** Provides guidance on proper disposal practices, including container use and disposal methods

**Section 14: Transportation Information:** Information for shipping and transporting of the hazardous material

**Section 15: Regulatory Information:** Identifies safety, health and environmental regulations not found in other sections

**Section 16: Other Information:** Indicates when the SDS was last prepared or when the known revision was made, along with other useful information

**Employee Monitoring.**

To prevent potential health hazards to workers, O SHA has established permissible exposure limits or P E Ls for many chemicals used in sterilant and disinfectant formulations. These include ethylene oxide - (EO), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and others.

Glutaraldehyde is a chemical commonly used as a high-level disinfectant in the SPD. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health recommends that exposure to glutaraldehyde be under 0.2 parts per million or p p m, time­ weighted average or T W A over an eight-hour work shift. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists recommends a ceiling value of .05 ppm, which should not be exceeded at any time.

**Healthcare facilities are required by O SHA to:**

-   Provide adequate ventilation systems

***

-   Establish safe work operating procedures

***

-   Provide PPE

***

-   Implement other methods to ensure that occupational exposure limits are not exceeded in the workplace

***

-   Mechanical monitoring systems can aid in the detection of chemicals present in the work area. These systems can detect the presence of chemicals at levels far below the level an employee would be able to detect *by* smell

***

-   Personal monitors that measure individual exposure to chemical vapors *by* measuring the presence of specific chemicals in the employee's breathing zone are also available

***

**Fire Hazards.**

**Fire requires three elements to be present at the same time; these elements make up what is known as the fire triangle:**

1.  A **combustible** or flammable substance

***

2.  A source of **oxygen**

***

3.  A source of **ignition**

***

**To prevent fires**, at least one of the elements in the triangle must be eliminated.

**Fire and Explosions.**

A fire occurs when the temperature of a flammable or combustible substance is raised high enough for the individual carbon and hydrogen atoms to combine with oxygen, and the resulting energy is released. If the material is a solid, it will burn only at its surface. In contrast, if the material is a volatile liquid, such as alcohol, which readily vaporizes, or a gas, such as EO, the flame front passes quickly through the substance. The result is an explosion accompanied by the instantaneous generation of large quantities of heated gases. Their rapid expansion creates a very loud pressure wave that can cause significant damage.

-   **Combustible: Is** A substance that, if ignited. will react with oxygen and burn.

***

Combustible loading is the weight of combustible materials per square foot of area where the materials are located. The presence of large volumes of combustible materials and flammable substances poses unique risks. Large combustible loading created by single-use items and their wrappings in storage, and as trash, is especially dangerous. When these materials burn, large quantities of highly toxic smoke are produced.

**Even with hospital compartmentalization features that limit the spread of smoke and fire, a high-risk situation occurs; therefore, healthcare fire safety programs must include:**

-   Minimization of the combustible load

***

-   Fire response plans

***

-   Early detection

***

-   Containment of the fire and combustible products

***

-   Extinguishment

***

-   Evacuation plans

***

**Combustible Loads.**

It is important to minimize the volume of combustible substances because a prime rule of fire protection is, **Don't give fire a place to start.**

**Strategies to minimize combustible loads include:**

-   Ensuring that single-use items are safely stored by keeping them in areas with proper temperature and humidity.

***

-   Minimizing trash buildup. Each facility must have an adequate trash handling program that includes covered trash containers of noncombustible construction and adequate volume at each site of trash generation.

***

**Fire Response Plan.**

Every healthcare facility requires a comprehensive fire response plan, and all staff members in every department must know their specific role in these plans. The fire safety emphasis should begin at the time of new employee orientation and should continue with ongoing training.

Every healthcare facility is required to have and maintain sprinkler systems, smoke detectors, fire extinguishers, and audible alarms to warn and protect staff and patients.

Each SP technician must participate in their facility's fire training and become aware of the fire safety items within their work area. Carefully following the facility's fire plan is important for staff and patient safety. When a fire emergency occurs, everyone must understand their role and act quickly.

**Training may include:**

-   Location of nearby fire pull stations

***

-   Location of nearby fire extinguishers

***

-   All exit routes from the SPD to a safe designated location

***

-   Fire emergency response or RACE

***

**Rescue or Remove:** Any patients, guests or staff needing assistance must be evacuated per the facility's emergency evacuation plan

**Alert or Alarm:** Activate the fire pull station, call 9 1 1 and any internal emergency services

**Confine or Contain:** Once everyone is removed from the area, close off or contain the fire as much as possible by closing doors

**Extinguish or Evacuate:** Using the fire extinguisher, attempt to put out the fire, use the PASS method, Pull, Aim, Squeeze and Sweep if comfortable performing the procedure. If the fire requires more than one fire extinguisher, evacuate to a safe designated location.

**How to use a fire extinguisher using the PASS method:**

-   Pull the pin of the extinguisher

***

-   Aim the extinguisher at the base of the fire

***

-   Squeeze the extinguisher to activate

***

-   Sweep the extinguisher side to side at the base of the fire

***

**Workplace Violence.**

According to O SHA, approximately two million people fall victim to **workplace violence** each year.

**All employees should pay attention to possible warning signs, and they should:**

-   **Workplace violence: Is** Any act or threat of physical violence, harassment, intimidation or other threatening or disruptive behavior that occurs at the work site.

***

-   Immediately report to management any direct threats of violence or retaliation.

***

-   Note behavior, statements or attitudes that are unusual, threatening or disconcerting.

***

Employees should be aware of their facility's specific policies on workplace violence and attend education programs that provide information on prevention and response, such as active shooter training. An active shooter is an individual actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a confined and populated area; in most cases, active shooters use firearms and there is no pattern or method to their selection of victims. Facility training should include how to respond when an active shooter is in the vicinity.

**These steps include:**

-   **Evacuate:** If there is an accessible escape path, attempt to evacuate the premises.

***

-   **Hide:** If evacuation is not possible, employees should find a place to hide where the active shooter is less likely to find them.

***

-   **Take action against the active shooter:** As a last resort, and only when one's life is in imminent danger, attempt to disrupt and/or incapacitate the active shooter.

***

AREA-SPECIFIC SAFETY CONCERNS

Some safety concerns are common in specific work areas within the SPD, and it is important that all employees are made aware of those concerns and hazards.

**Soiled Receiving and Decontamination Areas: Safety tips when working in soiled receiving and decontamination areas include:**

-   Never reaching into a basin or container that houses contaminated objects unless the objects in the basin are clearly visible. Instead, use a sponge forceps to grasp the object or pour out any solution that prohibits visual examination, and then remove objects from basins or containers one at a time. Never use foaming detergents when handling contaminated instruments in the decontamination sink, as the foam can prevent visualization of sharp objects.

***

-   Never reaching into trash containers or sharp containers.

***

-   Never removing scalpel blades in the SPD area. If a blade is found in the decontamination area, do not attempt to remove the blade without proper training.

***

-   When processing reusable sharps technicians should separate them from other instruments and position them in a manner that protects anyone who may handle them.

***

-   Following the manufacturer's recommendations for safe use of chemicals. Always wear recommended PPE to protect skin surfaces and mucous membranes from chemical burns.

***

-   Following the manufacturer's recommendations for safe operation of cleaning and testing equipment.

***

-   Using caution when walking and inspecting the floor for slippery surfaces. Utilize mats and non-skid footwear.

***

-   When cleaning instruments in a sink, always scrub below the surface of the water to avoid the formation of **aerosols.**

***

-   Keeping sinks and other working surfaces at proper levels that provide easy access that reduces the risk for splashes and aerosolization as well as back and arm strain.

***

**Aerosol: Is** A suspension of ultramicroscopic soiled or liquid particles in air or gas; a spray.

**Preparation and Sterilization Areas**

**Safety tips when working in the SPD's preparation and sterilization areas include:**

-   Moving sterilizer carts to low or no-traffic areas and other designated areas so that co-workers will be less likely to come in contact with hot carts

***

-   Using thermal insulated gloves when handling steam sterilizer carts, washer baskets and other objects subjected to high temperatures. Hot sterilization carts, sterilizer doors and washer baskets can leave serious burns if not handled properly.

***

-   Keeping sterilizer doors closed when not loading or unloading the chamber to protect co-workers from coming in contact with the hot inner door

***

-   Using caution when operating heat sealers. Keep away from heated components and be sure to follow the manufacturer's instructions.

***

-   Being cautious when using a cutting edge to prepare paper/ plastic peel packs

***

-   Using caution when testing instruments for sharpness

***

-   When lifting instrument sets, use the larger muscles in legs and arms. Hold the item as close to the body as possible, without touching the body.

***

-   Following procedures for using and disposing of biological indicators

***

-   Ensuring that proper signs and labels are posted to warn of hot surfaces or other hazards

***

**Sterilization area.**

**Steam sterilizers:** Use caution to avoid burns when working with steam sterilizers.

**H2O2 sterilizer safety :** Use caution when handling H2O2 containers; damaged containers may release sterilant into the work area. Items in an aborted cycle may contain trace amounts of H2O2,which can cause a chemical burn to unprotected hands and skin. Careful disposal of wrappers, peel packs and indicators should be performed with gloved hands.

Healthcare facilities using EO must have an operational, dedicated ventilation system to remove fumes exhausted during the cycle. This exhaust system should be checked regularly to ensure that any fumes in the employees' breathing zone are captured. It is also necessary to have an audible and visual alarm that will sound in case of a malfunction.

EO canisters should be stored in an approved containment locker. Check local regulations for the maximum amount of canisters allowed in the area.

**EO sterilizer safety:** EO has been strongly regulated by the federal government for many years. In 1984, O SHA established a l p p m P E L, and a 0.5 ppm **action level - AL** for EO. The P E L and A L limits are expressed as an eight­ hour time weighted average or T W A.

They represent the total allowable worker exposure during an eight-hour period and express it as an average exposure during the period. OSHA amended its rule on occupational exposure to EO by adding a 5-p p m **short-term exposure limit – S T E L** over a 15-minute period. S T E L is typically related to tasks such as performing sterilizer maintenance.

-   **Action level - (AL):** Level of exposure to a harmful substance or other hazard at which an employer must take required precautions to protect the workers. It is typically one-half the permissible exposure limit (P E L).

***

-   **Short-term exposure limit – S T E L:** Maximum concentration of a chemical to which workers may be exposed continuously for up to 15 minutes without danger to health or work efficiency and safety.

***

Sterilizer manufacturers now include many safety features on their EO sterilizers. These include negative-pressure airflow to help prevent exposures in the event the unit malfunctions during the cycle, and automatic mechanisms keep the sterilizer locked down until the aeration cycle is completed.

**Safety precautions when working with EO equipment include:**

EO sterilization should be performed in a separate area, away from other department work areas. Technicians must comply with all federal, state and local air quality and worker safety regulations relating to employee safety, discharge, air monitoring, and recordkeeping.

The exposure of any person to EO must be reported immediately to the SP manager, employee health nurse or employee health service, and the Emergency Department. Employees must understand that several harmful effects can be contributed directly to EO. Exposure to EO can cause eye pain, sore throat, breathing difficulties, and blurred vision. Exposure can also cause dizziness, nausea, vomiting, headache, convulsions, blisters and coughing.

Both human and animal studies show that EO is a carcinogen that may cause leukemia and other cancers. EO is also linked to spontaneous abortion, genetic damage, nerve damage, peripheral paralysis, muscle weakness as well as impaired thinking and memory. In liquid form, EO can cause severe skin irritation upon prolonged or confined contact.

**Supply Receiving, Break Out and Storage Areas.**

To ensure a safe and efficient supply receiving area, adequate storage space and traffic access must be available. Supply storage and shelving units must be secure and steady. Shelves should be arranged to facilitate maximum space efficiency and allow employees easy access to supplies. Heavy materials and items used most frequently should be placed on middle shelves to allow employees to easily and safely access them. Lighter, infrequently used items should be placed on higher shelves.

Employees should use appropriate equipment, such as steps, stands and ladders, to safely reach the upper shelves. Climbing on shelves is not acceptable. Procedures for the safe operation of dollies, hand trucks or carts to handle bulk materials must be available, and employees must be trained to consistently comply with them.

Closed trash containers should be available to properly dispose of unwanted materials. Containers for the appropriate storage of hazardous or flammable materials must be readily available to avoid hazardous chemical exposure. Employees working in this area must also follow proper procedures when disposing of and removing hazardous materials. The SDS must be available for reference wherever these substances are used.

**Safety tips for Supply Receiving, Breakout and storage Include:**

-   Using caution when removing items from storage units or shelves. Allow time to perform the tasks and ensure adequate space is available to maneuver the items being received.

***

-   Always cutting away from the body or to the side whenever a box-cutting tool is used. Retract the blade into the handle or cover the blade with a sheath when the device is not in use. Scalpels should not be used as a box-cutting tool.

***

-   Avoiding twisting and jerking movements when picking up or removing objects from tight spaces.

***

-   Inspecting work areas for objects left in pathways, or for equipment with parts that protrude into a traffic path. Aisles and doorways must always remain clear.

***

-   Performing appropriate stretching exercises prior to work to avoid injuries to the back and other bodily areas affected by lifting, pushing and pulling.

***

-   Using transport carts, when possible, to minimize lifting and carrying.

***

**Equipment Storage and Transportation.**

Areas where supplies and equipment are stored while awaiting requests from patient care areas can also be dangerous. These areas can have substantial activity and often have limited space to move about freely. Many types of patient care equipment require electrical charging, so multiple electrical outlets must be available. All portable electrical equipment, including items used in the SPD and patient care areas, must comply with applicable electrical codes.

Adequate storage space should be provided, and shelving should be of adequate capacity and strength. Sturdy, easily controlled carts should be provided for transferring items.

Transporting supplies and equipment through the facility can pose several safety concerns. SP technicians must be aware of their surroundings and take extra care to help ensure they keep themselves and those around them safe as they perform their duties. Food service and patient transportation devices, such as gurneys and wheelchairs, may be in use in patient care areas. There may be corners and elevators that present hazards if proper techniques are not used by employees when transporting patients and other items.

**Safety tips include:**

-   Avoiding excessive speed. Be prepared to stop quickly if a person steps into the hallway from a doorway. Always yield to patients.

***

-   Using caution when approaching doorways, hallways, elevators and high-traffic areas.

***

-   Not using a transport vehicle to push or prop open automatic doors.

***

-   Not parking carts and mobile equipment in hallways where they may block traffic or door access. Always keep hallways clear for the free flow of traffic.

***

-   When transporting carts or equipment, ensuring that the path in front and on each side of the transport equipment is visible.

***

-   Inspecting floors for uneven surfaces or defective tiles or edges to ensure that equipment being transported will not be thrown off balance.

***

-   Using caution when approaching corners or intersections of hallways. Use safety mirrors whenever available.

***

-   Using caution when pushing objects up or down hallway inclines. Push from behind when going up an incline and pull from in front of an object being transported down an incline.

***

-   Not riding or stepping on wheeled supply carts or other vehicles.

***

-   Considering the use of powered carts, if available, for moving heavy or awkward loads.

***

**Clerical and Other Workstations.**

Poor workstation design can create issues for SP personnel. Repetitive activities, such as bending over sinks, sitting at a computer desk and standing while assembling instrument sets, should be evaluated in an effort to reduce unnecessary stress and strain.

**Safety tips in clerical and other workstations include:**

Ensuring the assembly work will be performed at levels that will lessen employee fatigue and strain.

-   Ensuring that floors in work areas where employees must stand have fatigue mats to relieve leg strain.

***

-   Providing appropriate chairs for computer and clerical workstations that properly support employees' backs.

***

-   Ensuring that items are frequently used for routine tasks are stored within easy reach to avoid strain to the upper body from repetitive movements when retrieving the items.

***

-   Exercising caution when using filing cabinets. When multiple drawers are open at the same time, the cabinet can tip over. Also, avoid leaving bottom drawers open when not in use because people can trip or fall if they open into a walkway

***

**Surgical Service Areas.**

SP technicians may have responsibilities that include services in surgery or other procedure areas. They should become familiar with possible hazards in all areas they visit and observe applicable safety policies and signage. These spaces have many of the same hazards found in other areas. Additionally, they may have hazards applicable to the use of lasers, X-ray equipment, and chemicals utilized during surgical procedures. Caution is required when entering areas when such equipment is in use. Specific safety precautions provided by the manufacturers should be reviewed and followed by employees.

**Additional SP Safety Concerns.**

Equipment that is not functioning correctly may cause injury. A preventive maintenance (PM) program is required to ensure optimal operation and function of equipment used for SP activities. This equipment includes sterilizers, washer disinfectors, heat sealers, and other processing equipment that should be routinely inspected and serviced by certified, experienced service personnel. Inspection records should be maintained, and copies should be readily available in the SPD. These records should be verified by the department's manager to ensure that the equipment used by SP employees is safe for use.

**SP personnel should promptly report equipment in need of PM or repair.**

Handling Compressed Gas Cylinders

SP technicians are often involved in the handling, transport and storage of medical gas cylinders dispensed for direct patient care and treatment, or for use as equipment components.

These cylinders may contain oxygen, helium, nitrogen or other gases. Specific safety protocols should be used for each specific gas, and the protocols should be in compliance with the product's handling instructions in the applicable SDS. Medical gas cylinder safety precautions include:

-   Never dispensing gas cylinders for use without a label.

***

-   Securing gas cylinders at all times to prevent tipping. Place them in a secured holder for this purpose, or securely strap or chain them in an upright position.

***

-   Handling cylinders carefully during transport. They should never be rolled, dragged or dropped.

***

-   Using a cover cap to protect the cylinder's valve during transport.

***

-   Using an appropriate regulator for the cylinder's contents. Cylinder regulators are gas-specific and not necessarily interchangeable.

***

-   Inspecting threads on cylinder valves, regulators and other fittings for damage before connection.

***

-   Clearly labeling all cylinders as: full, in use or empty.

***

-   Not storing empty cylinders with full ones.

***

-   Ensuring gas cylinder regulators are equipped with either a hand wheel or stem valve. Stem valves require a key that should always remain with the regulator.

***

SP technicians should also be familiar with any emergency procedures that may be needed when using equipment. For example, SP technicians should be familiar with emergency shut­ off procedures for any equipment in their work area.

DISASTER PREPAREDNESS

Disaster preparedness is an important component of the SP safety system. Each facility has developed a comprehensive response plan for internal and external disasters.

-   An **internal disaster:** is any situation with the potential to cause harm or injury to the healthcare facility employees or where the loss of utilities may drastically impact departmental operations. Examples of internal disasters include a hazardous chemical spill or leak, loss of power, or failure of a utility such as water, electricity or steam.

***

-   An **external disaster:** is a situation where activities outside the facility impact departmental or facility operations. Examples that may necessitate activation of the external disaster plan include earthquakes, floods, hurricanes or other events that result in large numbers of seriously injured patients being sent to the facility. When an external disaster occurs, the entire facility is placed on alert, and personnel from each department are expected to perform tasks based on the situation present.

***

**Disaster Plans.**

SPD disaster plans, like those of other departments, should be consistent with and support the facility's plans. Most facilities use an Incident Command System (ICS), a standardized approach to the command, control and coordination of emergency response. SP managers must ensure the SPD's disaster response activities and expectations are included in the overall ICS plan.

**Elements of an SPD disaster plan typically include:**

An emergency call list outlining the lines of authority and the key individuals to be notified in the event of specific types of disasters.

Protocols for inventory replenishment and the delivery of emergency supplies. Usually, supply distribution department personnel are responsible for the maintenance of supplies and will deliver to an area for emergency patient care in times of disaster. Posted evacuation plans and practice drills for employees to ensure they know alternative ways to leave the department if their safety is at risk. SP technicians should actively participate in all disaster training and drills. It is important to understand roles and responsibilities during a disaster situation and be prepared to perform the assigned duties.

**Biological Disasters.**

Many healthcare facilities have added biological incidents to their disaster plans. As with other types of disasters, SP technicians should know their role. Close communication with the Infection Prevention and Control department is critical in this type of disaster.

SPDs should utilize appropriate resources, such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for up­-to-date information regarding emerging biological threats. Other resources, such as the World Health Organization can also provide guidance. In all instances, coordination between Infection Prevention and all areas impacted by the disaster is very important.

-   **Internal Disaster. A** Situation with the potential to cause harm or injury to Sterile Processing or other employees, patients or visitors, or where the loss of utilities may drastically impact departmental operations

***

-   **External Disaster. Is** A situation in which activities external to the facility affects departmental or facility operations

***

EMPLOYEE ACCIDENTS AND INJURIES

Even significant efforts to emphasize safety and accident prevention cannot eliminate all employee accidents, and SP technicians can still be injured on the job. If an injury occurs, it must be documented and reported to the appropriate administrative personnel, in compliance with O SHA regulations for healthcare facilities. An investigation is needed to provide information about the cause, the situation, and/or the behaviors that were involved in identifying contributing factors, hazards or unsafe practices. Then, corrective actions must be implemented to revise the systems or physical conditions and address the behavior that caused the injury. This is necessary to help prevent future injuries or accidents.

Regardless of how insignificant an injury may seem, the appropriate manager should be informed immediately. Details regarding time, place, tasks performed and a description of exactly what happened must be recorded on the appropriate form. 1l1e form should then be submitted to the facility's safety officer, Human Resources - (HR) department, Employee Health, or other entity, according to the facility's protocol.

A process should also be in place for SP technicians to report unsafe situations before an accident or injury happens. If an unsafe situation is identified, it should be reported immediately so the risk of injury can be minimized.

PATIENT ACCIDENTS AND INJURIES

SP professionals have a responsibility to help prevent patient and employee injuries, accidents and infections. They do so as they perform the important tasks of decontaminating, inspecting, testing, assembling, packaging, sterilizing, aseptically handling sterile items, and delivering items according to established procedures. When their job is done correctly, risk to the patient is greatly reduced.

When a patient incident occurs, it must be promptly investigated and documented. Any practices or physical conditions within the facility that can cause a patient injury must also be investigated and reported. All healthcare workers must report unsafe practices or hazards immediately to minimize accidents and prevent their recurrence.

EMPLOYEE INFORMATION AND TRAINING

No safety and risk management system can be successful without employee involvement. Each employee must understand their role and responsibilities in maintaining a safe environment. This requires education for staff at all levels of experience.

All new SP employees should attend a facility-provided health and safety orientation to become familiar with hazards and safety practices throughout the facility.

**They should also attend a department-specific orientation that focuses on the following:**

-   Notification of employees about any operations in their work area where hazardous substances are present

***

-   Location and availability of written hazard communication program information

***

-   Physical and health effects of any hazardous substances they may encounter

***

-   Methods and observation techniques used to determine the presence or release of hazardous substances in the work area

***

-   Strategies to lessen or prevent exposure to these hazardous substances through safe control and work practices and the use of PPE

***

-   Steps the department has taken to lessen or prevent exposure to hazardous substances

***

-   Instructions on how to read labels and review SOS to obtain appropriate hazard information

***

-   Emergency spill procedures

***

-   Disaster and fire plans, and the role of the SPD in their development and implementation

***

EMPLOYEE PREPAREDNESS

An important factor in safety and risk management is employee awareness and preparedness. Every employee should approach each shift and task with two questions in mind: What can I do to ensure my safety and the safety of those in the facility? and What do I need to know to respond if I am faced with an emergency?

**Some strategies to help ensure emergency preparedness include:**

-   Being familiar with safety policies. Ask questions if specific information is not understood.

***

-   Being familiar with the chemicals used. Know how to handle them safely and what to do in the event of an emergency.

***

-   Knowing how to work safely around equipment. Understand the hazards and know where emergency shut-offs are located.

***

-   Being familiar with evacuation routes and the location of fire extinguishers and fire alarm boxes.

***

-   Leaving each area safe. Wipe up spills, prevent trip hazards and do not cross-contaminate.

***

-   Maintaining a safe environment at all times. Pay attention to detail and report anything that threatens the safety and well­ being of those in the facility.

***

The success of any safety system depends on the individuals who work within that system. Creating and maintaining a culture of safety reduces risks for everyone.

In CONCLUSION.

SP technicians play an important role in every healthcare facility's safety program. It is important that all SP employees know the expectations and arc able to perform efficiently and calmly during any type of situation that may arise. For the safety of patients, visitors, other employees and departmental staff, training and safety drills must be taken seriously, as should the adoption of safe work habits that help ensure preparedness for any unplanned emergency.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter.**

-   **Risk management**

***

-   **Ergonomics**

***

-   **Hazardous waste**

***

-   **Secondary container**

***

-   **Polymerization**

***

-   **Combustible**

***

-   **Workplace violence**

***

-   **Aerosol**

***

-   **Action level - (AL)**

***

-   **Short-term exposure limit - (STEL)**

***

-   **Internal Disaster**

***

-   **External Disaster**

***

This concludes chapter 22. Thank you
