**Chapter 23.**

**Success Through Effective Communication and Human Relations Skills.**

**Learning Objectives**

As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to Explain why Sterile Processing technicians must use effective communication and human relations skills

1.  Define the term "professionalism" and list traits of quality-focused Sterile Processing professionals

***

2.  Describe behaviors that can impact on-the-job success

***

3.  Use basic tactics for effective communication in the workplace

***

4.  Discuss approaches to improve teamwork

***

5.  Define the term "diversity" and understand why it is important

***

6.  Review common workplace communication issues

***

INTRODUCTION

The responsibilities of Sterile Processing technicians relate directly to patient health and well-being. SP technicians must have the knowledge and skills to address the sophisticated concepts addressed in this technical manual; however, they must also interact with other people in their department-and in other departments within the facility-as well as with vendors, suppliers and others. Doing so requires consistent use of communication and human relations skills. A Sterile Processing department - (SPD) where all employees demonstrate professionalism and utilize effective communication skills is an ideal setting that can be accomplished when each SP technician adopts the behaviors and practices outlined in this chapter.

NEED FOR EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION AND HUMAN RELATIONS SKILLS

SP technicians, like all other healthcare professionals, must have effective interpersonal skills. Effective communication is one facet of interpersonal skills because it allows a person to understand someone else's needs and interests. **Human relations** skills are also important because they allow people to use the information gained from communication to interact effectively with others.

-   **Communication:** is the process of transmitting information from one person to another by use of words and non-verbal expressions such as body language. The concept of human relations involves the development and maintenance of effective interpersonal (between people) relationships that enhance teamwork and help ensure a positive work environment.

***

-   **Human relations: Is** The development and maintenance of effective interpersonal (between people) relationships that enhance teamwork.

***

-   **Communication:** The process of transmitting information and understanding from one person to another by use of words and non-verbal expressions such as body language.

***

Many communication and human relations principles are applicable on the job and most can be used off the job as well. While people are unique in many respects, they also share many commonalities, which may include specific needs, wants and desires-all of which help form a framework for human relations.

The use of appropriate communication and human relations skills is important whenever people interact. Today, much communication is done through the internet through computers or smartphones, however, technicians must also be comfortable with face-to-face verbal communication to effectively interact with their customers. Human interaction is critical in the SPD. The healthcare environment is very labor intensive, with many processes being equipment-dependent. Still, machines do not replace the need for human judgment and skills as SP technicians undertake their job responsibilities.

SP technicians must work with their peers, departmental supervisors and managers. They also must represent their department as they interact formally and informally with staff members in other departments throughout the facility. SP technicians may also come in contact with patients, their families and visitors to the facility, including those conducting business with departmental managers.

Regardless of the situation, effective communication and solid human relations skills are a must. It is also important to recognize that some SP professionals may understand details of inspecting and assembling complex surgical instruments and can apply specialized skills to operate sophisticated sterilization equipment, but they may have difficulty interacting with others. Proper use of communication and human relations skills is important for the success of all SP technicians in all healthcare facilities. Fortunately, these principles can be learned and are easy to apply on the job. The ability to do so is a characteristic of professional SP technicians.

These days, when healthcare organizations face public scrutiny, the need for effective communication and the application of appropriate human relations skills continues, even when healthcare employees are off the clock. What one says and does not say and what one does and does not do, reflects on the individual as well as their employer, regardless of where and how the communication occurs.

COMMON COMMUNICATION BARRIERS

Communication problems happen far too frequently. Even when everyone speaks the same language, common communication missteps can lead to errors, frustration and strained relationships. The following are some approaches that can lead to misunderstanding and prevent effective communication:

Asking questions that can be interpreted differently, such as, Can you come to work early? What time is early?

Relaying vague requests. Imagine a new technician answering a call to "Send up the old instrument that Dr. Smith used to use: Which instrument?

Providing answers that do not give adequate or detailed information. Surgery, for example, may ask how long until a tray is ready, and the too-brief response could be, It's in the sterilizer: For how long? Is the cycle ending or just beginning?

Using **jargon –** slang, or department-specific language that may not be readily understood by others. An example could be stating to "Check the biological on the loaned trays and get them to eight. The TF has moved to first." Is this jargon or phrasing something a new employee would understand?

-   **Jargon or slang:** In the workplace, specialized words or phrases known only by people working in a certain position.

***

While adopting the communication principles discussed in this chapter will not resolve all communication problems, it will help address many of them.

SP TECHNICIANS ARE PROFESSIONALS

A professional is a person working in an occupation that requires extensive knowledge and skills to be successful in their role. A profession involves individuals with education and experience and who possess a specialized body of knowledge.

Membership within a profession is usually controlled by licensing, registration and/or certification, and this certainly applies to SP professionals.

Professionals are proud of themselves and the work they do. They tackle their job effectively and efficiently and try to improve their profession in the process. A professional "goes the extra mile;' is part of the team, tries to put forth the best possible effort to meet the facility's and department's goals and is truly interested in what is best for their fellow employees, customers and patients.

Professional SP technicians know what their manager expects of them and strive to consistently meet those expectations. They are effective communicators and are courteous and concerned about the problems encountered by other staff members.

A large part of job success is affected by how well employees get along with their supervisor. Ideally, both parties will demonstrate mutual respect and understanding. Still, friction can sometimes occur. When this happens, it becomes even more important to develop, maintain and improve the relationship. SP technicians should recognize that their boss may not be their friend or buddy. A professional relationship will address job tasks and human relations concerns.

Those who obtain promotions and pay raises and most quickly attain career goals often enjoy the respect of their peers and supervisors. This respect is most likely experienced when an employee cooperates, is dependable and ambitious, and is willing to work hard to become successful.

MORAL, LEGAL AND ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

SP technicians must follow a professional code of conduct that includes moral, legal and ethical aspects of responsibility.

Moral conduct relates to basic principles about what is right and wrong. Patients who enter the hospital entrust their lives to the staff. SP technicians, like all healthcare employees, must honor this trust and carry out their duties in compliance with each detail and procedural step. They must accept responsibility to follow work schedules, maintain good attendance, and follow established policies and procedures in the best interest of patient care. Professional SP technicians also utilize resources wisely and do not question or ridicule others' beliefs or personal possessions.

SP professionals respect the rights of their co-workers. Additionally, they do not promote gossip or conduct that negatively impacts the best interests of their team, department or organization.

Legal behavior is determined by the authority of laws, and one must never overstep the limitations of these responsibilities. Laws protect staff as well as patients. Staff members are expected to perform job duties in the way they have been taught; therefore, technicians should not perform duties that have been designated for or assigned to a licensed or registered professional unless they meet those requirements. Technicians pay attention to details, follow each step in written procedures and instructions, and maintain thorough records and documentation.

Ethical behavior relates to what is right and wrong, relative to the standards of conduct for a profession. Ethical conduct is required of SP technicians at all times; however, the difference between what is right and wrong can be viewed from different perspectives.

**How does one determine if a proposed action is ethical? Answering the following questions may be helpful:**

-   Is the proposed action fair?

***

-   Does the proposed action hurt anyone or could it?

***

-   Am I being honest as I undertake the proposed action?

***

-   Can I live with myself if I do what I am considering?

***

-   What if everyone did it?

***

-   What are the consequences of my actions?

***

-   Would I want my actions to become public knowledge?

***

Each day, SP technicians are faced with situations that require them to make moral, legal and ethical decisions. Understanding what is right and the ramifications of doing what is wrong, could make those decisions easier.

COMMUNICATION BASICS

Some employees cannot effectively express their thoughts to co-workers; others may become distracted when someone speaks to them. A primary communication concern relates to speaking and another factor involves listening. Breakdowns with speaking or listening can interfere with the successful exchange of information between individuals.

SP technicians play an important role in their facility's communication process. They provide feedback, including ideas and suggestions to their supervisors who, in turn, communicate information up and down the chain of command. Each person's role in this communication process is vital to its success.

Some employees assume effective communication is easy (after all, people have been communicating their entire lives). In reality, the process is not difficult but it does require use of basic principles. Improving communication can be as simple as developing some basic speaking and listening skills.

**Basic Speaking Skills**

**SP technicians speak to a diverse group of people on a daily basis. Consider using these principles when speaking with others:**

-   Unless carrying a facility-assigned phone, personal phones should be muted or turned off during the entire conversation.

***

-   Identify the main points in the message; organize what will be said and ensure that, while speaking, each main point is addressed.

***

-   Stay focused. Do not ramble, digress or discuss points that are not critical to the message.

***

-   Concentrate on the listener rather than on oneself. Remember that the main objective of speaking is to communicate.

***

-   Use language that the listener will understand.

***

-   Be professional. Use appropriate language, tone and volume.

***

Answer questions or concerns honestly, even if the listener will not be happy with the answer. If one does not have an answer, let the listener know when they can expect to hear from you with the answer.

**Infection Prevention and Technology**

Phones and other personal technologies carried into the department from outside sources are highly contaminated with microorganisms, some potentially pathogenic. Most personal electronics cannot be properly cleaned and disinfected without causing permanent damage.

Check with your department for specific policies regarding personal communication technologies.

**Basic Listening Skills**

A good portion of each day is spent speaking and listening. Some SP technicians spend more time speaking than listening. Skilled listening is a very important skill to acquire. Once people know they are being listened to, they will be more likely to communicate before their topic becomes a critical issue.

**Basic techniques to improve listening include:**

-   Focusing on what the speaker is saying and not becoming distracted. Don't let an uncomfortable physical environment cause a distraction. There may be few places within a busy SPD where the environment is ideal for effective communication, but it is important to try and make the best of it.

***

-   Not being influenced by emotions. Avoid an immediate evaluation of the message and try to think about its content objectively.

***

-   Staying engaged, even when the message seems familiar or unimportant, or when the speaker's opinion differs from one's own.

***

-   Considering the speaker's perceptions as the message is heard. Understand the speaker's basic ideas before criticizing them.

***

-   Avoiding simply listening for specific facts. There may be additional information that is an important part of the message.

***

-   Not tuning out when listening to complicated information. Use feedback such as, I really don't understand what you are saying or Can you please say that in another way? to inform the speaker that their message was not conveyed effectively.

***

-   Allowing the speaker to finish and then reacting fairly to the message that was stated. Avoid formulating a response to the message while listening to the speaker.

***

-   Taking notes, when appropriate, if the information is detailed or specific or if it will be helpful in the future.

***

**Types of Communication**

Communication flows through formal and informal channels within the SPD. Formal communication is structured and orderly, like classroom instruction, while informal communication has no structure and usually occurs during downtime, breaks, etc.

**Examples of formal communication include:**

-   Instructions, advice and **coaching** by managers and supervisors

***

-   Facility and departmental policies and procedures that help regulate behavior and work practices

***

-   Discussions during departmental and other meetings

***

-   Individual and group training presentations

***

-   Facility and departmental bulletins, memos, newsletters, and related communication tools

***

-   Performance evaluations

***

-   Employee work schedules

***

-   Conversations related to delegated project assignments

***

-   Monitoring ongoing work activities

***

**Coaching, Is both :**Positive reinforcement used to encourage SP technicians to follow proper work behaviors, and negative reinforcement to discourage inappropriate work behaviors.

Informal methods of communication within SPDs include casual conversations between employees before, during and after work. Much of this communication is beneficial because it can improve the working relationships of staff members. Unfortunately, informal communication can also be damaging. For example, rumors or other information circulated without knowledge of the source or concern about whether it is factual.

Rumors and grapevine gossip can negatively impact the team and the department. False information can cause anxiety and frustration and increase an already stressful work environment. In some cases, information may be factual but should not be shared with the team. For example, if a staff member learns of a fellow co-workers personal problems, that information should not be shared unless the affected co-worker chooses to share it.

Gossip and rumors erode personal relationships and trust. They can waste time and shift the SP team's attention away from its real purpose.

**Telephone and Technology Etiquette**

The manner in which SP technicians answer and speak on the telephone reflects on their department, their facility and themselves. Each facility has policies and procedures to address professional expectations for telephone and technology etiquette. It is important to be aware of the facility's requirements and carefully follow them.

**Whose Technology Is It?**

Healthcare facilities and the Sterile Processing departments within them have invested significant financial resources in communications technology. It is increasingly difficult for many people to imagine how they could manage their professional and personal lives without seemingly constant access to computers, tablets, copiers, printers, smartphones and other telephones and other electronic communication equipment.

With the convenience of technology, however, comes the opportunity for misuse when facility equipment is used for personal purposes such as shopping on the internet, sending personal emails, and photocopying private or personal materials. Problems include time away from the job, increased facility expenses, and the blurring of the distinction between acceptable and unacceptable behaviors.

These concerns and other related issues are often addressed in facility policies and identified in employee handbooks and other documents. Professional SP technicians must know about these policies, understand their importance and consistently comply with them.

**Music in the Workplace**

Many SPDs allow music to be played in work areas. Music can promote a more comfortable atmosphere and may make the working experience more enjoyable. What follows are some guidelines for ensuring that music is enjoyed without creating distractions and jeopardizing the professionalism of the department.

The type or genre of music listened to at work reflects the SPD and the healthcare facility. Do not listen to music that would be deemed unprofessional by the facility or its staff. When in doubt, don't play it. Lyrics should not be offensive to anyone in the department.

Music should be played at a low volume. Background music should allow staff to carry on a normal conversation without having to raise their voices. Music should not be heard in other areas of the department, public hallways, departmental offices, etc. If the telephone rings or a person needs to make a call, the music volume should not have to be turned down; it should barely be detected by the person on the other end of the call.

Time spent selecting, arranging and changing music must be kept to a minimum. Meeting the needs of patients and other customers is always the top priority.

Headsets or earphones should not be used because they can reduce the technician's ability to hear the telephone, machine cycle alarms, questions from co-workers, and other important sounds that are a part of the job.

Another concern created by advancing technology is the common availability of smartphones and other technologies that enable employees to text, speak, explore the internet, email and take photographs from almost anywhere. In addition to concerns regarding non-productive time, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), hospital policy and confidentiality concerns could become problematic if information captured in personal photographs or videos is shared outside the facility.

HUMAN RELATIONS

SP technicians may have the knowledge and skills required to do their job properly, but they cannot be successful unless they know how to get along with their supervisors, peers and customers. Professional SP employees possess the following human relations skills:

-   They recognize each of their fellow employees as individuals and, when possible, incorporate this understanding into how they interact with other staff members.

***

-   They contribute effectively to their team because this benefits the department, facility, profession and the patient.

***

-   They develop a genuine spirit of cooperation and teamwork amongst themselves, their peers and those at higher organizational levels.

***

It is relatively easy to talk about human relations skills' positive impact on the organization; however, it is much more difficult for SP technicians to consistently apply those skills. The workplace requires staff members to interact with many employees of different backgrounds, interests and job responsibilities. Such factors make it increasingly difficult to practice effective human relations.

**There are numerous ways that SP technicians effectively apply their human relations skills on the job. For example, they:**

-   Take responsibility for maintaining positive working relationships with supervisors, peers and others in the healthcare facility.

***

-   Set aside personal feelings for other SP employees on the shift, being sure to ask questions and assist challenging co-workers just as one would for co-workers with whom they are on friendlier terms.

***

-   Act in a professional manner.

***

-   Serve as a contributing member of the department and healthcare team.

***

-   Accept the responsibility to continually learn and, when applicable, help their peers do the same.

***

-   Promote cooperation among their peers. This is done by helping others, sharing knowledge and experience, and trying to understand others' perspectives.

***

-   Accept full responsibility for their own actions or inaction, and not try to pass the blame to another person, shift or department.

***

**Behaviors That Can Impede Success**

Being successful in the workplace involves much more than having the technical skills to perform a job.

**The following are common behaviors that can impede success and, in some cases, lead to disciplinary action:**

-   Refusing to follow directions, orders, policies and procedures

***

-   Being unwilling to adapt to change

***

-   Talking too much and/or conducting personal business while at work

***

-   Using personal electronics during assigned work time

***

-   Demonstrating inconsistent and unreliable work behaviors

***

-   Engaging in gossip and other behaviors that reduce group productivity

***

-   Failing to get along with others

***

-   Being dishonest and lacking in integrity on the job

***

-   Failing to complete assignments in a timely manner

***

-   Making or contributing to excessive errors

***

-   Regularly missing work or being tardy

***

-   Abusing substances

***

***

SP TECHNICIANS AND TEAMWORK

SP technicians must work as part of a team because the roles they perform relate directly to those being done by others. Consider, for example, that the main goal of every SP technician is to help patients. Teamwork is essential for ensuring that the patients are best served.

What one employee does or does not do, affects the work of others and also impacts the success or failure of the SPD. For example, staff in the decontamination area may work intently to clean turnaround instruments as quickly and safely as possible, and the assembly technicians may assemble and package them as quickly as is feasible; however, if the instruments are not put into the sterilizer as soon as possible, a delay will occur that could impact the surgical staff and jeopardize patient care.

**Teamwork is beneficial to the facility in other ways as well. For example, it can**:

-   Improve productivity through increased staff cooperation

***

-   Increase employee job satisfaction

***

-   Improve the work environment by creating a common purpose for staff members

***

-   Decrease job-related stress

***

**Factors Impacting Teamwork**

Developing a culture where teamwork is valued and practiced requires the dedication and effort of each team member.

**The following characteristics are vital for an effective team:**

**Good attitude:** A proper attitude is the most important factor driving effective teamwork. SP technicians' attitudes about their job, peers and patients impact their actions. An employee's attitude is often influenced by co-workers. If everyone on the team gets along, likes their jobs and the facility and wants to provide good service, each staff member will probably have a good attitude. By contrast, if a co-worker has a negative attitude about the job, supervisor or facility, and does not care about the quality of work, teamwork will suffer.

-   **Attitude:** Emotions that cause a person to react to people and/or situations in a predetermined way.

***

-   **Cooperation:** To provide good service, one must be willing to assist and work with other employees.

***

-   **Promptness:** When an employee is late to work or does not show up, the remaining members of the team must work harder. As a result, work quality and morale can suffer.

***

-   **Trust**: An effective member of a team trusts co-workers and supervisors. Co-workers and supervisors also trust each team member.

***

**Types of Groups**

SP technicians belong to both formal groups and informal groups. Teamwork concerns are important for both types.

A healthcare facility is comprised of a formal group of employees who, at the highest organizational level, have the same boss: the Hospital Administrator and Board of Directors. As staffing plans are developed, smaller work groups are established. The SPD is an example of a formal group. Work in the SPD may be divided into other formal groups, including those relating to specific work areas and shifts.

Each formal work group has a formal leader who is responsible for coordinating and directing the group.

A task group is another example of a formal group. Members work together to perform essential non-routine activities. For example, a committee might address a specific concern, and a work team may develop a job breakdown for training purposes. After the task group's work is completed, the group is typically dissolved.

Informal groups develop for several reasons, including common interests of members; a desire to be "close" to others in a similar situation; economics; and a desire to satisfy specific but common personal needs. Informal groups may include employees who take lunch or other breaks together, work the same shift, participate in after-work activities, and carpool.

Informal work groups are not necessarily good or bad. Each can assist, harm or have no impact on the facility's efforts to attain goals. Informal groups can form cliques, exclusive groups of individuals who intentionally exclude others. These groups also frequently develop an informal communication system, called the "grapevine;' which can spread rumors (a negative outcome) or provide helpful information.

**Teamwork and Decision Making**

In some healthcare facilities, SP technicians can participate in the decision-making process in their department by participating in cross-functional teams. A cross-functional team is a group of employees from different departments within the healthcare facility that works together to resolve operating problems. Consider, for example, a problem that involves instruments that are unavailable when needed in the Operating Room - (OR). A cross-functional team composed of OR, SP and staff from other departments may yield creative alternatives that would not be considered when a group with a narrower focus addressed the issue.

**Relating Experience to Job Success**

Experience should impact job success, but that is not always the case. The benefit that experience brings to the work situation is not equal to time spent on the job. In the fast-paced world of SP, ongoing professional development and continuing education are critical for one to make a full contribution. Unfortunately, experience can encourage some to develop an attitude of entitlement.

By contrast, experience can be invaluable because it provides insight about what has and has not been successful in the past. Experience can improve the knowledge and skills that help SP technicians become successful. This type of input is important when experienced staff members are encouraged to participate in the decision-making process or when individuals serve on cross-functional teams.

STERILE PROCESSING AND DIVERSITY

**Diversity** adds dimension to the SP work team. There are numerous aspects of diversity that shape values, expectations and experiences. These include education, family status, organizational role and level, religion, first language, income, geographical location, and more. Every person is unique and brings special qualities to the job.

-   **Diversity: Is** The broad range of human characteristics and dimensions that impact the employees' values, opportunities and perceptions of themselves and others at work.

***

-   Developing a work environment where all co-workers are respected provides the following advantages:

***

-   The creation of a welcoming and rewarding work environment improves job satisfaction.

***

-   When people are valued, employee turnover and absenteeism are minimized and associated costs are reduced.

***

-   A culture of understanding, respect and cooperation encourages teamwork.

***

-   Diverse backgrounds create more creative alternatives as decisions are made and problems are resolved.

***

CUSTOMER SERVICE SKILLS FOR SP TECHNICIANS

**Basics of Customer Service**

Customer service refers to the relationship between the SP team and its customers. These customers include anyone who utilizes SP's services, including doctors, nurses, clinicians, patients and vendors. One brief positive or negative encounter with a customer can leave a lasting impression about the entire department. This impression can then be passed on to other customers.

Providing a service is not always easy. Some SP customers are the direct patient caregivers who, themselves, have customers - the patients. SP technicians must be committed to providing excellent support service, so their counterparts throughout the facility can also provide excellent service and care to the patient.

Providing exemplary service requires the consistent delivery of safe, high-quality products and services. Each employee must strive to do their part to support the facility's and department's goals.

Each functional area and work shift in the SPD depends on others. The quality of each step in the processing cycle is affected by previous and subsequent steps. If decontamination and cleaning procedures are not done effectively or in a timely manner, the sterilization process may be ineffective and or products may not be available when needed. SP technicians must function as a team to achieve quality customer service.

Providing more personalized service is also beneficial. SP professionals should get to know their customers and, when possible, use their names when communicating needs and addressing special requests.

Cheerful, courteous and friendly behavior is also effective for promoting effective customer service. The provision of good service requires SP technicians to constantly assess the quality of their services, follow up on commitments, and solicit feedback. Quality service is a reflection of professionalism, and it requires maturity, self-esteem, competence, confidence and a positive attitude.

Emergencies and crisis situations are a reality in the healthcare environment; however, even during stressful times, a calm, professional attitude must prevail.

**Cooperation with Operating Room Personnel**

No two departments in a typical healthcare facility work more closely than the OR and SPD. The outcome of every patient procedure depends on effective communication and cooperation between personnel in these two fast-paced, ever-changing departments.

Much of the relationship between OR and SP staff is dependent upon mutual trust, communication and cooperation. To earn and maintain trust, each department must work hand in hand with the other and communicate effectively and often.

SP technicians should spend some time learning how each department and their respective procedures affect the SPD, and how the SP processes affect each department. This process makes it easier to see how less-than-optimal service can affect patient care and customers' opinions of the SPD. Spending time during orientation in different departments is an effective way of understanding how other departments operate.

**Communication Is Critical**

Differences in communication systems used by different departments can create challenges. Slang terms, jargon and nicknames used to describe medical instruments and supplies, for example, may not be familiar to all staff working in different departments. Also, instrument and supply needs change - often several times a day, and if information doesn't travel smoothly, frustration can increase and relationships may become strained.

Communication between OR and SP staff should be ongoing and not just occur when an incident occurs or after an issue has been identified. Also, simple actions, such as showing appreciation for the efforts and assistance of personnel in the other department, can help establish a stronger bond between both groups.

**Handling Customer Complaints**

Customer complaints can arise, even when the best procedures and protocols are in place, and even when staff diligently adhere to them. When facilities endorse the concept of empowerment, SP technicians can more easily resolve customer complaints by implementing a practice of **service recovery.**

-   **Service recovery: Are** sequences of steps used to address customer complaints and problems in a manner that yields a win-win situation for the customer and the department.

***

SETTING PRIORITIES

There may be times when SP technicians face multiple tasks. How should priorities be established in these instances' The most important things should be done first.

**These might be identified by asking questions such as:**

-   What is the immediate need?

***

-   What can I do to help my team?

***

-   What task would I want done if I were the supervisor?

***

-   What is the best use of my time right now?

***

It is not uncommon for priorities to change during a shift. For example, the addition of a trauma case will necessitate reprioritization of work tasks. SP technicians must be adaptable to changing needs and always put the patient first.

AVOIDING WORKGROUP COMPARISONS

Sometimes, SPDs fall into, shift wars: where some or all employees assigned to a specific shift begin to believe that the work they do is more important than others' work. For example, a day shift may wonder what the night shift does with their time.

In reality, not all shifts have exactly the same duties, and priorities do change throughout each 24-hour period. It is unrealistic to assume that all shifts work in exactly the same way and under exactly the same circumstances.

These types of comparisons can lead to misunderstandings between shifts and individual employees, which can then lead to communication breakdowns and negatively impact the ability to work as an effective team.

COMMITTING TO PATIENT CARE DURING DISASTERS

No one can predict when disasters will occur; however, each healthcare facility and SPD should anticipate the most likely crisis that may arise. From there, plans that incorporate the most appropriate responses to crises can be developed.

**All SP technicians should be prepared to provide service during emergencies. To do so, they should:**

-   Study their department's/facility's disaster plans and ask questions, if necessary.

***

-   Take disaster drills seriously.

***

-   Keep the SPD informed of current contact information, so an accurate call-back roster will be available if it is needed.

***

-   Make personal plans that will allow support of patient care. For example, SP professionals should have a back-up arrangement for childcare and family communications if remaining at the hospital is required for an extended time.

***

-   Remember to remain calm and positive during a disaster. The stress level will be high, and making a conscious effort not to add to the stressful environment will benefit everyone.

***

-   Focus on the job and what is needed to meet patient needs.

***

-   Do not share patient information with anyone outside the hospital.

***

COMMUNICATING WITH THE MEDIA

Personnel from the news media will contact healthcare facilities for information. Each facility has trained personnel assigned to interact with the media. If approached or contacted by the media in any way, do not give out any information. Always refer them to the appropriately trained personnel.

EMAIL

While everyone today uses email, it is important to project professionalism while using email at work. Composing a professional email makes it more likely that people will respond positively to your emails. It shows people that you are professional and polite, and makes it less likely to cause misunderstandings.

**Guidelines for writing professional emails include:**

-   Once something has been written, it becomes, in a sense, part of a permanent business record. Unlike oral communication, there is no chance to retract an error or clarify a point that may offend or confuse the target audience.

***

-   All emails should include an appropriate subject line. The subject Iine should be clear and as brief as possible. In today's busy facilities, emails with vague or cute subject lines are likely to be ignored, skipped or deleted.

***

-   Only discuss public matters. The contents of emails should not be confidential or a topic that, if posted publicly or sent to someone unplanned, would embarrass the sender or the facility.

***

-   Confidential information should never be sent over the internet. Even though many email systems are secured: a recipient may forward the message to an unintended person who may not know to keep the information confidential. On occasion, email systems have also been compromised. Confidential information may be sent electronically only if using a facility-approved site such as an internal incident reporting and resolution program.

***

-   Create a new email instead of continuing to: reply. At some point, including all of the previous replies becomes cumbersome and redundant. Include only the necessary information from the chain to support your message, such as the elate and time of earlier pertinent responses, so the receiver does not have to hunt through an excessive number of emails.

***

-   Do not use jargon, slang, generational terms or emojis. This practice is unprofessional and such messages are easily misinterpreted.

***

-   Do not use humor, including funny sayings, comics or political cartoons. Not everyone has the same sense of humor, and some may be offended by the topic. Trying to be funny may also reduce the importance of your message.

***

-   Keep the email brief. Supply only pertinent information and do not be redundant. People are too busy to read unnecessary information and may tend to ignore emails from those who send lengthy messages with too much or irrelevant information.

***

-   Don't email when angry. When angry, it is easy to say something that could be regretted by the sender, recipient or both. It is always best to wait until some of the anger has passed and a clearer thought process can be used for communication. Remember, once sent, a message cannot be taken back.

***

-   Be sure the punctuation is correct. Leaving out or using incorrect punctuation can be perceived as sloppy or not well thought out. It can also give the impression that the sender did not feel the message was important.

***

-   Proofread the message before sending. Be sure the message is what was intended. Every email is a reflection of the sender. Misspelled words, poor grammar, punctuation errors, emotion, humor or anger do not reflect favorably. These mistakes make the sender look careless.

***

-   Remember, once the message is in cyberspace, it no longer belongs to the sender. Others can edit, forward and share it, and the edited message may be sent to people for whom it was never intended.

***

SOCIAL MEDIA

Like email, social media is widely used today. Many of the rules for email are the same for social media. It is important to remember that social media is often shared, so a personal message may quickly travel around the world and be seen by hundreds of people.

**In addition to the rules stated for email, considerations for social media use include:**

Sharing any information about facility activities on social media may be infringing on a patient's HIP AA rights or go against facility policy.

Sharing pictures that have not been approved may show something that is also an infringement on a patient's or staff members rights.

Avoiding the mixing of work communication with personal communication. Discussing business information that has not been released to the general public can be detrimental to one's career. It is also inappropriate to discuss social gatherings and other non-business topics.

Avoiding heated debates or conversations that may embarrass family, friends, co-workers or the healthcare facility. These conversations may be sent to others, including people who do not need or want the information.

Using caution when posting and tagging pictures. Post only photographs that have been approved for social media sites and only to the approved sites. Posting unauthorized photos can be a violation of HIPAA requirements, the facility's confidentiality policy, or both. Do not Lag any person until a release to do so has been obtained.

Being careful of the information shared. This also applies to personal accounts. It is common for organizations to look at personal social media accounts before scheduling an interview or making a job offer. Checking social media is also common during some disciplinary actions.

Many times, evidence against the accused is retrieved from social media accounts. Misrepresenting personal information on social media, including being untruthful about job titles and employment information, can lead to termination of an existing position or the loss of a wanted position.

Asking if the facility has a policy regarding the use of its name in online discussion boards, non-business accounts, and personal websites. Comply with the instructions as given.

In CONCLUSION.

SP technicians have challenging, critically important and ever­ evolving responsibilities. Managing these duties effectively, consistently and efficiently requires good communication and human relation skills and an understanding that a well­ operating department can only be had in the presence of a well­ functioning team.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Human relations**

***

-   **Communication**

***

-   **Jargon - slang**

***

-   **Coaching**

***

-   **Attitude**

***

-   **Diversity**

***

-   **Service recovery**

***

This concludes chapter 23. Thank you
