Chapter 24.

**Personal and Professional Development for Sterile Processing.**

Learning Objectives

**As a result of successfully completing this chapter, the reader will be able to** Explain the meaning of personal development and how it can impact a career in Sterile Processing

1.  List possible career paths available to Sterile Processing professionals

***

2.  Review strategies for professional goal setting

***

3.  Identify strategies to enhance professional skills and expertise

***

4.  Understand the key aspects of resume or curriculum vitae development

***

5.  Understand the basic steps for the interviewing process

***

6.  Identify opportunities for promotions and learn about positive personal behaviors and attributes that tend to get professionals noticed

***

INTRODUCTION.

Learning is a lifelong endeavor, and change is inevitable. Never have these statements been truer than when applied to the field of Sterile Processing - (SP). SP technicians must be prepared to encounter frequent growth in their positions. Whether SP technicians wish to stay in the Sterile Processing department - (SPD) or seek advancement or promotion to other areas of the organization, personal and professional development will enable them to be proactive and more easily prepare for the change. This chapter highlights some of the resources and strategies available to help SP technicians grow and advance in their careers.

-   **Personal development:** Are Activities that identify and develop talent and personal potential, improve your employability, and enhance quality of life.

***

-   **Professional development:** Is the Commitment to continuous learning and improvement; taking responsibility for your own development.

***

PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

WHAT IT IS AND WHY IT IS IMPORTANT

In some ways, personal development is the first step toward professional development. Personal development may be defined as any activity that identifies and develops talent and personal potential and improves employability and quality of life. Personal development can help individuals develop personally rewarding goals.

Professional development specifically refers to the skills and knowledge attained for both personal and career advancement. It provides the information and experience needed to progress in a career, stay competitive with other job seekers and, ultimately, become more employable.

Personal development is usually an individual endeavor­ something a person does on their own time; however, more employers are recognizing the importance of investing in personal development. Employers may offer educational programs as part of the organization's employee benefits program to help staff learn more about time and stress management, teamwork, healthy lifestyles, and competency and career development. Ultimately, these programs are a win-win for both employees and the healthcare facility because personal development can create a workplace that is happier, healthier and more fulfilling. This environment can lead to greater productivity and quality in a department, which helps the healthcare facility meet its strategic goals.

Personal development should be a lifelong process, and it is more of a journey than a destination. Choose smaller goals that are attainable and build on those successes. For example, if a long-term goal is a college degree, set the first goal as successfully completing one college course. Upon successful completion of the goal, the individual can set their goal for the next class.

**Strategies for Personal Development**

**Personal development involves four key steps:**

**Step 1: Identify the goal.** What do you want to achieve?

**Step 2: Identify the requirements for the goal**. What will you need to achieve the goal?

**Step 3:** **Identify personal strengths and areas that need improvement.** What can you build on? What do you need to improve?

**Step 4**: **Create an action plan with a timeline for meeting that goal**. How do you plan to *move* forward?

Types of Professional Development

**Professional development can be divided into two categories:**

Professional development to keep current in an existing job - Growth is inevitable in the SP field, and some professional development is mandatory, even for those who wish to remain in their current position. For example, changes in procedures, policies, instrumentation, products, and sterilization technologies, as well as changes in regulations and standards, must be adopted by every employee. Job growth in an effort to stay current is required of all SP technicians.

Professional development to advance one's career - Some SP technicians have goals to advance their careers through position advancement and promotion. They participate in activities to improve their professional competence, enhance their existing skills and develop new ones. They move out of their comfort zone to take on new responsibilities and learn new things.

The job market, technology, regulations and practices are always evolving, and an employer may not provide staff with all the skills needed to keep up or move forward in the profession. Whether a person prefers to remain in a current position or dreams of advancement, it is essential to consider the benefits of taking ownership of one's career by continually improving knowledge and skills.

Learning opportunities through conferences, continuing education, and on-the-job training help SP technicians keep up with trends and changes in the SP field. This allows technicians to anticipate change more easily and helps them recognize professional opportunities.

If an SP technician is a leader or would like to become one, professional development will provide the knowledge and confidence to influence and lead others by example.

Taking part in activities to improve professional competency will give SP technicians the skills they need to become more effective in their position. This will help demonstrate an ongoing commitment to the profession, improve employability with current and future employers, and lead to a more fulfilling and rewarding career.

An SP technician may be familiar with sterilization standards as a requirement of the job. If they are able to teach those standards to new employees, this will increase their understanding of the standards. Teaching an educational Inservice or short course can sharpen one's technical skills and help develop training and public speaking skills.

SP CAREER PATHS

While many SP technicians choose to remain employed in an SPD and become experts at their assigned duties, some seek different career paths. Common career opportunities for SP technicians include lead technician positions in the SPD, SP management positions, SP clinical educators, Operating Room - (OR) core technicians, OR liaisons, faculty positions in local community and technical colleges, consultants, and vendor positions such as sales representatives and on-site product/service facilitators.

Each career path has specific requirements. It is prudent to research the needed requirements and develop personal and professional goals to move forward on a specific career path.

PLANNING CAREER GOALS

SP professionals looking to make their career more personally meaningful and rewarding should establish clear goals and periodically review them. This will identify activities and steps that will help meet those objectives.

As with personal development, professional development requires identifying areas in a present position in need of improvement and then moving forward with set goals. In many ways, the steps to take for professional development are similar to those one would take for personal development, with a specific emphasis on developing one's position and career advancement.

**Strategies for Planning Career Goals**

**Step 1:** Determine the goal for improving professional skills for employability

**Step 2:** Identify the requirements for the goal. What will be needed to achieve it?

**Step 3:** Identify personal strengths and areas in need of improvement

**Step 4:** Create an action plan with a timeline for meeting the goal

**Basic Technical Skills for SP Technicians**

-   Hand - eye dexterity

***

-   Active listening and communication skills

***

-   Problem solving

***

-   Prioritization

***

-   Ability to change tasks as needed

***

-   Ability to evaluate job tasks for accuracy and completeness

***

ADVICE ABOUT CAREER GOALS

Personal development is a lifelong process, and professional development is a career-long process. Sometimes, employees get discouraged because they set lofty goals that do not materialize immediately. Most goals are achievable, but there may be many smaller goals to accomplish along the way before the larger goals can be achieved. For example, if the goal is to become the SP Director, that will likely require meeting educational goals and attaining prior other leadership experience, as a lead technician or supervisor. When identifying what is necessary to achieve the final goal, be sure to identify individual steps that may be needed to prepare for that goal.

**Those steps may include:**

-   Certification

***

-   Attending educational conferences

***

-   Becoming active in professional groups

***

-   Engaging in on-the-job training in leadership, job and task­ related skills

***

-   Obtaining a degree

***

-   Logging more time or developing more experience in a certain position

***

THE IMPORTANCE OF RESOURCES

One of the most important factors in attaining goals is finding the right resources to provide direction and support. Educational resources include publications, printed resources, courses, conferences, online information and other types of information designed to enhance knowledge about a specific process or topic.

**A Note About Online Resources**

When using online resources, make sure the information and source are valid and current.

Developing professional resources within the SP field can provide a network with which to share information on issues pertinent to the department. SP peers may have already faced similar situations and may be able to share insights and information.

Do not underestimate the importance of developing a network beyond one's current specialty. OR professionals, infection preventionists, safety officers and biomedical engineers are a few of the healthcare specialists who can help SP technicians increase their knowledge about specific aspects of the field-and healthcare, in general.

There are several ways to build a network of resources. Becoming active in a local professional group or SP chapter is a great place to start. If there is no group in the area, contact local SPDs and explore the possibility of starting one. The first step can be as simple as gathering interested individuals at a local healthcare facility or business establishment.

PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES

There are also ways to enhance existing skills and develop new ones to increase knowledge and professionalism and attain more expertise.

**Social Media Information**

Much information can be found on social media; however, it is important that whatever information one chooses to use is carefully vetted to ensure it is accurate.

DEVELOPING A RESUME OR CURRICULUM VITAE

Every technician should develop and maintain a resume or a curriculum vitae or (CV), these documents are one of the keys to capturing the attention of hiring managers and obtaining a new role or position.

A resume is a compilation of one's skills, education and accomplishments. It provides a prospective employer with information to help them determine if a job candidate has the necessary knowledge and skills to be successful in a specific role. A CV is an academic summary of the individual's experience, skills and accomplishments. CVs include personal teaching experience, awards, degrees and published works. There are key differences between the two documents.

A resume is usually used by professionals who are reasonably new to a job position or profession, and resumes are usually one to two pages in length. A CV is typically provided by professionals with extensive experience in the position being sought - or similar positions. This document is lengthier than a resume and highlights accomplishments in the important areas of the new position.

One concept of professional development is building a resume or CV through the advancement of skills. For example, if one aspires to become an SP staff educator, gaining experience presenting in-services, training new employees, or developing educational tools for the department can strengthen those skills.

Sometimes, obtaining a new position, either externally or through a promotion within the current healthcare facility, can be decided by a very small margin. For example, if an individual's resume includes experience in staff education, that may offer an advantage in the selection process for an educator position.

**Many templates exist to assist with writing a resume or CV. Regardless of the chosen format, be sure to follow these simple rules:**

-   Be truthful

***

-   Research the duties of the job being sought and use personal experiences to help demonstrate to the employer or hiring manager that you are the best candidate for the job

***

-   Write the resume or CV to the desired job position and include experiences that complement the job position

***

-   Include education and skills that complement the desired position

***

-   Organize information in a logical fashion and keep the information clear and concise

***

-   Spell out all acronyms to ensure clarity with the presented information

***

-   Use a resume template. Numerous templates can be found at no charge on the internet

***

-   Carefully proofread the entire document to ensure there are no typographical or experience errors. Consider having another professional review the document as well

***

-   Ensure the resume or CV is attention-getting for all the right reasons. Use a high-grade resume paper and consider using a professional: yet slightly less-used font. An off-white or pale-grey paper may also help differentiate one's resume from others

***

-   Avoid injecting humor into the resume or CV

***

-   Do not submit a personal photograph or video with the resume or CV

***

-   Exclude sensitive information: age, marital status, religious affiliation

***

-   Keep the document updated so it is always ready when needed

***

***

UNDERSTANDING THE INTERVIEW PROCESS

SP technicians are involved during the initial selection process, and they participate in performance evaluations that typically include an interview-like component. While much of the process is controlled by the manager or another person conducting the interview, the interviewee or the SP technician can benefit from using basic speaking and listening techniques during these sessions. This is especially important because contemporary interviewing methods emphasize a participative approach whereby the person conducting the interview interacts with rather than: lectures to the interviewee.

Interviewers may ask two types of questions: open-ended and closed-ended. Open-ended questions permit the interviewee to respond in an unstructured manner. Behavioral questioning is an open-ended approach that utilizes past behaviors to help predict future actions or behaviors. This type of questioning is used to help judge a candidate's problem-solving skills and focuses on how a candidate handled various work situations.

**Examples of open-ended and behavioral questions may include:**

-   What do you think the role of a SP technician should be?

***

-   Can you provide an example of a time when you communicated successfully with another person, even when that individual may not have agreed with your point of view?

***

-   Closed-ended questions call for a brief response. Examples may include:

***

-   Do you like your job?

***

-   Do you understand the correct way to do this task?

***

Many interviews include both open- and closed-ended questions. One important step in preparing for any interview is to carefully research the job and anticipate the types of questions likely to be asked and then plan a response for them. A good response is one that answers the question and provides supporting details. This is an opportunity to display one's knowledge and understanding for the profession, not to provide: textbook answers. Along with well-thought-out responses, an interviewee should also prepare some questions for the interviewer. This demonstrates an interest for the position and allows the interviewee to participate in the interview process.

There are several different types of interviews. The most common is a face-to-face interview with either a Human Resources - (HR) staff member or an SPD supervisor. In some instances, a candidate will meet with the HR person, followed by the SPD supervisor.

Some facilities use group interviews for many positions. These interviews include SP personnel and staff members from other departments like the OR. This type of interview may seem more stressful, however, if one researches the position and practices responses to anticipated questions, stress will be lessened.

Recently, online interviews have become more popular. This type of interview may be done for positions in another city or state but may be also done for any job opening, even when applying for a position in one's current facility.

Interviews should be approached thoughtfully and professionally. Dress professionally, even for online interviews, be punctual and take the interview seriously. Even if interviewing for a position at one's current place of employment, it is important to follow these general interview protocols to demonstrate professionalism and readiness for a change and added responsibilities.

**Four Basic Steps for Any Type of Interview**

Step 1: **Ensure the exact purpose of the interview is known**, along with the time, location and estimated duration.

**Step 2: Be prepared for the opening conversation.** Hopefully, there will be an initial discussion of mutual topics of interest to move the discussion away from ongoing work considerations to the specific topic. Professional SP technicians should have the confidence, pride, expertise, and positive attitude to allow them to be confident during the interview.

**Step 3: Understand that questions will be asked.** This is where the interviewee's anticipation of potential questions and ability to effectively speak and listen will be most useful. It is also where application of the speaking and listening tactics outlined previously will be most helpful.

**Step 4: Recognize that the interview discussion can be reviewed**. Ideally, the interviewer will provide a summary. The SP technician should provide reactions to this review so that both parties can agree on what was decided and which, if any, follow-up activities should be undertaken.

**PROMOTIONS**

Many SP technicians who perform their jobs well have opportunities for promotion to positions with additional responsibilities and, often, higher compensation. Those who accept these positions will likely find many differences in tasks, especially if they assume supervisory duties. Challenges arise when a staff member who has been a peer to other employees becomes their supervisor. Relationships change and must reflect the new supervisor/subordinate dynamic.

Subordinate An employee who is supervised by someone in a higher organizational position.

All management positions must consider the broader needs of the department and the healthcare facility before the specific needs of individual staff members.

SP technicians who are considering promotions should also recognize that some tasks will be different.

Technicians with the knowledge and skills to perform cleaning, decontamination and related tasks, for example, may not be as comfortable performing supervisory activities, such as planning, coordinating, directing, controlling and evaluating.

Long-term planning that leads to promotion-related decisions should be an integral part of SP technicians' professional development process.

**Positive Behaviors That Get Noticed:**

-   Ability to work effectively on a team

***

-   Practicing effective time management

***

-   Being courteous, friendly and helpful

***

-   Taking responsibility for actions, outcomes and personal and professional growth

***

-   Collaborating with co-workers and outside departments

***

-   Being respectful

***

-   Demonstrating a: can-do attitude

***

-   Having good attendance

***

-   Asking questions

***

-   Mentoring others

***

-   Working well with difficult co-workers

***

-   Possessing critical-thinking skills

***

PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT TlME-LINES

Some personal and professional development goals are easier to attain than others. Promotions usually don't happen overnight, and preparing for promotions takes time as well. Personal and professional development timelines should be realistic and achievable. Goals require planning, commitment and an understanding that things don't always go as planned. When setbacks occur, and they sometimes do, it is essential to regroup and continue moving toward established goals.

**Formal Education**

Continuing formal education, either through a community college, technical college or four-year university, should be a consideration for anyone interested in career advancement. Many schools now have online classes and self-study programs that make it easier to continue formal education goals.

The first step is for the individual to decide where they want to be in the future and what the requirements of that position entail. Usually management positions require some type of degree, for example. Depending on the position, a two-year Associate's or technical degree may be required, and other positions may require a four-year degree.

If the ultimate goal is to remain in one's current position, obtaining some formal education may help maintain a position in an ever-growing field. Many technical schools have courses in communication, public speaking, planning, leadership, and lime and project management, all of which are helpful skills for almost any vocation.

While educational institutions typically encourage students to register for multiple courses during a quarter or semester, it is also possible to take only one course at a time. Starting with one course may be more manageable with many professionals' busy lifestyles. If it has been some time since the individual has left school, lacking a course that is interesting and fun can help them re­ acclimate to time requirements for school and study. Bear in mind that the course may have nothing to do with the workplace or specific position being sought; the important thing is that professionals seeking to advance their careers take steps to begin the learning and career advancement process.

In CONCLUSION.

The SP profession is dynamic and ever evolving and requires professional and dynamic individuals to help lead the way in education, systems development and departmental management. Through personal and professional development, SP technicians can not only enhance the skills necessary to improve within their current positions but they can also create new opportunities for career fulfillment and growth.

**The following are the STERILE PROCESSING TERMS that should be studied, as part of your review process for this chapter**

-   **Personal development**

***

-   **Professional development**

***

-   **Subordinate**

***

***

This concludes chapter 24. Thank you
